--- PAGE 1 ---
TRIBHUVAN UNIVERSITY  
INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY  
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN COMPUTER SCIENCE AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY 
(COURSE OF STUDY)  
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
EFFECTIVE FROM ACADEMIC YEAR – 2079

--- PAGE 2 ---
ii 
 Tribhuvan University  
Institute of Science and Technology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course of Study  
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and 
Information Technology  
(B.Sc. CSIT)  
2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by  
Computer Science and Information Technology  
Subject  Committee  

--- PAGE 3 ---
iii 
 Introduction:  
The Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and Information Technology (B.Sc.  CSIT) 
curriculum is designed by closely following the courses practiced in accredited international 
universities, subject to the condition that the inta ke students are twelve years of schooling in 
the science stream or equivalent from any university recognized by Tribhuvan University 
(TU). In addition to the foundation and core Computer Science and Information Technology 
courses, the program offers severa l elective courses to fulfill the demand of high technology 
applications development. The foundation and core courses are designed to meet the 
undergraduate academic program requirement, and the service courses are designed to meet 
the need of fast changin g computer technology and application. Students enrolled in the four 
year B.Sc.  CSIT program are required to take courses in design and implementation of 
computer software systems, foundation in the theoretical model of computer science, and a 
functional b ackground of computer hardware. All undergraduate students are required to 
complete 126 credit hours of computer science course and allied courses.  
Objective:  
The main objective of B.Sc.  CSIT program is to provide students intensive knowledge and 
skill on different areas of computer science and information technology including design, 
theory, programming and application of computer system. It is envisaged that graduate of this 
program will be equipped with necessary knowledge of computer software and hardwa re 
system.  
Eligibility Condition for Admission : 
A student who seeks admission to B.Sc.  CSIT program:  
a) For grading system :  
 Should have successfully passed 11 and 12 class  in Science stream  with 
minimum full marks 100/100 in Physics and Mathematics respectively and 
should score final grade ‘C’ in all subjects.  
b) For percentage system : 
 Should have successfully passed 11 and 12 class  in Science stream  with 
minimum full marks 100/100 in Physics a nd Mathematics respectively and 
should score  minimum of second division.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
iv 
 c) For PCL (I.Sc.)  or equivalent :  
 Should have successfully passed I.Sc. or equivalent examination with 
minimum full marks 100/100 in Physics and Mathematics respectively and 
should score minimum of second division.  
d) For A level : 
 Should have successfully passed A Level in science  stream ( with full 
marks 100/100 in Physics and Mathematics respectively ) and should score  
minimum D Grade (With or without small letter).  
e) For CTEVT : 
 Should have successfully passes three years diploma in Engineering with 
full ma rks 100/100 in Physics and Mathematics  respectively and should 
score minimum of second division.  
f) For International Education Instit ute or International University:  
 Should have to submit equivalence letter from Curriculum Development 
Centre, Sano Thimi, Bhaktapur.  
g) Should have successfully passed the entrance examination conducted by Institute 
of Science and Technology ( IoST), TU securing at least 35% marks.  
h) Complied with all the application procedures.  
Course Duration:  
The entire course is of eight  semesters ( four academic years). There is a separate semester 
examination after the end of each semester.  
Hours of Instruction:  
a) Working days:  90 days in a semester  
b) Class hours:  
 3 credit  hours courses with theory and labs is equivalent to 3 lecture hours  and 3 lab 
hours = 6 working hours  per week.  
 3 credit hours theory -only cou rse is equivalent 3 lecture hours and 2 tutorial hours = 5 
working hours  per week.  
Evaluation : 
All the courses except project work and internship should have internal weightage of 40% 
and external weightage of 60%. For the course s having lab oratory work, the internal 
weightage is  divided into 20% laboratory work and 20% internal assessment. A studen t 
should secure minimum of 40% in each category to pass a course. The final grade and grade 

--- PAGE 5 ---
v 
 point in each course will be the s um of overall weightage of all categories. There will be a 
separate practical examination for the 20% weightage of lab oratory  work  in the presence of 
an external examiner.  
The Project work and I nternship are evaluated by different evaluators. To pass Project Work 
and I nternship, students should secure at least 40% marks in the evaluation of each evaluator 
and the final grade and grad e point will be the sum of all the evaluations. For the evaluation 
of final presentation, an external examiner will be assigned . 
Grading System : 
The grade awarded to each student in each course is based on his/her overall performance 
through internal and e xternal evaluations. Several evaluation criteria are used for the 
continuous internal  evaluation. External  evaluation is solely based on examination conducted 
by Institute of Science and Technology (IoST). The grade in each course is assigned using a 
letter grade that indicates the overall performance of each student in each course. The chart 
below represents letters with its corresponding grading scale, grade point, and performance 
remarks.  
Letter Grade  Grading Scale  Grade Point  Performance 
Remarks  
A+ 90 – 100 4 Outstanding  
A 80 – less than 90  3.7 Excellent  
B+ 70 – less than 80  3.3 Very Good  
B 60 – less than 70  3 Good  
C+ 50 – less than 60  2.7 Satisfactory  
C 40 – less than 50  2.3 Pass*  
F 0 – less than 40  0 Fail 
*Pass refers to acceptable  
The performance of each student in each semester shall be evaluated in terms of Semester 
Grade Point Average (SGPA) which is the grade point average for the semester. SGPA is 
calculated as  
semesterthein earned creditsof number Totalsemesterain earneds Po Grade TotalSGPAint
 
The cumulative grade point average (CGPA) is the grade point average for all completed 
semesters. CGPA is calculated as  
completed creditsof number Totalearneds Po Grade TotalCGPAint
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
vi 
 Final Examination : 
Institute of science and technology, Tribhuvan University, will conduct the final examination 
at the end of each semester  for each course except Project Work and Internship . The 
weightage of this final examination is 6 0% of the overall weighta ge. 
 
Course Structure:  
Semester I  
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC1 14 Introduction to Information Technology  3 100 
CSC11 5 C Programming  3 100 
CSC11 6 Digital Logic  3 100 
MTH11 7 Mathematics I  3 100 
PHY11 8 Physics  3 100 
Total   15 500 
Semester II  
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC16 5 Discrete Structure  3 100 
CSC16 6 Object Oriented Programming  3 100 
CSC16 7 Microprocessor  3 100 
MTH16 8 Mathematics II  3 100 
STA16 9 Statistics I  3 100 
Total   15 500 
Semester III  
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC2 11 Data Structure and Algorithms  3 100 
CSC2 12 Numerical Method  3 100 
CSC2 13 Computer Architecture  3 100 
CSC2 14 Computer Graphics  3 100 
STA21 5 Statistics II  3 100 
Total   15 500 
Semester IV  
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC2 62 Theory of Computation   3 100 
CSC2 63 Computer Networks   3 100 
CSC2 64 Operating Systems  3 100 
CSC26 5 Database Management System  3 100 
CSC26 6 Artificial Intelligence  3 100 
Total   15 500 

--- PAGE 7 ---
vii 
 Semester V  
Course  Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC3 25 Design and Analysis of Algorithms  3 100 
CSC3 26 System Analysis and Design  3 100 
CSC3 27 Cryptography  3 100 
CSC3 28 Simulation and Modeling  3 100 
CSC3 29 Web Technology  3 100 
 Elective I  3 100 
Total   18 600 
 
List of Electives:  
1. Multimedia Computing (CSC3 30) 
2. Wireless Networking (CSC3 31) 
3. Image Processing (CSC3 32) 
4. Knowledge Management (CSC3 33) 
5. Society and Ethics in Information Technology (CSC3 34) 
6. Microprocessor Based Design (CSC3 35) 
 
Semester VI  
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC3 75 Software Engineering  3 100 
CSC3 76 Complier Design and Construction  3 100 
CSC3 77 E-Governance  3 100 
CSC3 78 NET Centric Computing  3 100 
CSC3 79 Technical Writing  3 100 
 Elective II  3 100 
Total   18 600 
 
List of Electives:  
1. Applied Logic (CSC3 80) 
2. E-commerce (CSC3 81) 
3. Automation and Robotics (CSC3 82) 
4. Neural Networks (CSC3 83) 
5. Computer Hardware Design (CSC3 84) 
6. Cognitive Science (CSC3 85) 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
viii 
 Semester VII  
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC4 19 Advanced Java Programming  3 100 
CSC4 20 Data Warehousing and Data Mining  3 100 
MGT 421 Principles of Management  3 100 
CSC4 22 Project Work  3 100 
 Elective III  3 100 
Total   15 500 
List of Electives:  
1. Information Retrieval (CSC4 23) 
2. Database Administration (CSC4 24) 
3. Software Project Management (CSC4 25) 
4. Network Security (CSC4 26) 
5. Digital System Design (CSC4 27) 
6. International Marketing (MGT4 28) 
Semester VII I 
Course Code  Course Title  Credit Hours  Full Marks  
CSC 475 Advanced Database  3 100 
CSC 476 Internship  6 200 
 Elective IV  3 100 
 Elective V  3 100 
Total   15 500 
List of Electives:  
1. Advanced Networking with IPV6 (CSC4 77) 
2. Distributed Networking (CSC4 78) 
3. Game Technology (CSC4 79) 
4. Distributed and Object -Oriented  Database (CSC4 80) 
5. Introduction to Cloud Computing (CSC4 81) 
6. Geographical Information System (CSC4 82) 
7. Decision Support System and Expert System (CSC4 83) 
8. Mobile Application Development (CSC4 84) 
9. Real Time Systems (CSC4 85) 
10. Network and System Administration (CSC4 86) 
11. Embedded Systems Programming (CSC4 87) 
12. Interna tional Business Management (MGT 488) 

--- PAGE 9 ---
1 
 Introduction to Information Technology  
 
Course Title: Introduction to Information Technology   Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC114        Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester:  I 
 
Course Description:  This course covers the basic concepts of computers and information 
technology including introduction, hardware, software, memory, input/output, data 
representation, database, networks and data communication, Internet, multimedia, and computer 
security.  
 
Course Objective s: The main objective of this course is to provide students knowledge of 
fundamental concepts of computers and information technology.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to Computer (3 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Digital and Analog Computers; Characte ristics of Computer; History of Computer;  
Generations of Computer; Classification of Computer; The Computer System; Application of 
Computers  
 
Unit 2: The Computer System Hardware (3 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Central Processing Unit; Memory Unit; Instruction For mat; Instruction Set; 
Instruction Cycle; Microprocessor; Interconnecting the Units of a Computer; Inside a Computer 
Cabinet  
 
Unit 3: Computer Memory (4 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Memory Representation; Memory Hierarchy; CPU Registers; Cache Memory; 
Primary Memory ; Secondary Memory; Access Types of Storage Devices; Magnetic Tape; 
Magnetic Disk; Optical Disk; Magneto -Optical Disk; How the Computer uses its memory  
 
Unit 4: Input and Output Devices (4 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Input -Output Unit; Input Devices; Human Data En try Devices; Source Data Entry 
Devices; Output Devices; I/O Port; Working of I/O System  
 
Unit 5: Data Representation (6 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Number System; Conversion from Decimal to Binary, Octal, Hexadecimal; 
Conversion of Binary, Octal, Hexadecimal to De cimal; Conversion of Binary to Octal, 
Hexadecimal; Conversion of Octal, Hexadecimal to Binary; Binary Arithmetic; Signed and 
Unsigned Numbers; Binary Data Representation; Binary Coding Schemes; Logic Gates  
 
Unit 6: Computer Software (6 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Types of Software; System Software; Application Software; Software Acquisition; 
Operating System (Introduction, Objectives of Operating System, Types of OS, Functions of OS, 
Process Management, Memory Management, File Management, Device Management, Protect ion 
and Security, User Interface, Examples of Operating Systems)  

--- PAGE 10 ---
2 
  
Unit 7: Data Communication and Computer Network (5 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Importance of Networking; Data Transmission Media; Data Transmission across 
Media; Data Transmission and Data Networkin g; Computer Network; Network Types; Network 
Topology; Communication Protocol; Network Devices; Wireless Networking  
 
Unit 8: The Internet and Internet Services (4 Hrs.)  
Introduction;  History of Internet; Internetworking Protocol; The Internet Architecture;  
Managing the Internet; Connecting to Internet; Internet Connections; Internet Address; Internet 
Services; Uses of Internet; Introduction to Internet of Things (IoT), Wearable Computing, and 
Cloud Computing , Introduction to E -commerce , E-governance, and Smart City , GIS and its 
Applications  
 
Unit 9: Fundamentals of Database (4 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Database; Database System; Database Management System; Database System 
Architectures; Database Applications; Introduction to Data Warehousing, Data mining, and 
BigD ata 
 
Unit 10: Multimedia (3 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Multimedia - Definition; Characteristics of Multimedia; Elements of Multimedia; 
Multimedia Applications  
 
Unit 11: Computer Security (3 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Security Threat and Security Attack; Malicious Softw are; Security Services; 
Security Mechanisms (Cryptography, Digital Signature, Firewall, Users Identification and 
Authentication, Intrusion Detection Systems); Security Awareness; Security Policy  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
After completing this course, students sho uld have practical knowledge of different hardware 
components of computer, operating systems, Word Processors, Spreadsheets, Presentation 
Graphics, Database Management Systems, and Internet and its services.  
 
Text Books:  
1. Computer Fundamentals, Anita Goe l, Pearson Education India  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Introduction to Computers, Peter Norton, 7th Edition, McGraw Hill Education  
2. Computer Fundamental, Pradeep K. Sinha and Priti Sinha  
3. Data Mining Concepts and Techniques, Third Edition, Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber an d 
Jian Pei  
4. Cloud Computing Bible, Barrie Sosinsky, Wiley  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
3 
 C Programming  
 
Course Title:  C Programming     Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20 
Course N o: CSC 115      Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8   
Nature of the course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs. : 3 
Semester:  I 
 
Course  Course Description: This course covers the concepts of structured programming using C 
programming language.  
                        
Course Objective:  This course is designed to familiarize students to the techniques of 
programming in C.  
 
Course Contents:  
 
Unit 1: Problem Solving with Computer ( 2 Hrs. ) 
Problem analysis, Algorithms and Flowchart, Coding, Compilation and Execution, History of C, 
Structure of C program, Debugging, Testing and Documentation  
 
Unit 2:  Elements of C ( 4 Hrs. ) 
C Standards( ANSI C and C9 9), C Character Set, C Tokens, Escape sequence, Delimiters, 
Variables, Data types (Basic, Derived, and User Defined), Structure of a C program, Executing a 
C program, Constants/ Literals, Expressions, Statements and Comments.     
 
Unit 3:  Input and Output  (2 Hrs. ) 
Conversion specification, Reading a character, Writing a character, I/O operations, Formatted 
I/O 
 
Unit 4:  Operators and Expression  (4 Hrs. ) 
Arithmetic operator, Relational operator, Logical or Boolean operator, Assignment Operator, 
Ternary operato r, Bitwise operator, Increment or Decrement operator, Conditional operator , 
Special Operators( sizeof and comma), Evaluation of Expression, Operator Precedence and 
Associativity.  
 
Unit 5:  Control Statement ( 4 Hrs. ) 
Conditional Statements, Decision Making an d Branching, Decision Making and Looping, Exit 
function, Break and Continue.  
 
Unit 6: Arrays ( 6 Hrs. ) 
Introduction to Array, Types of Array (Single Dimensional and Multidimensional), Declaration  
and Memory Representation of Array, Initialization of array,  Character Array and Strings, 
Reading and Writing Strings, Null Character, String Library Functions( string length, string 
copy, string concatenation, string compare)  
 
Unit 7:  Functions  (5 Hrs. ) 
Library Functions, User defined functions, Funciton prototype , Function call, and Function 
Definition, Nested and Recursive Function, Function Arguments and Return Types, Passing 

--- PAGE 12 ---
4 
 Arrays to Function, Passing Strings to Function, Passing Arguments by Value, Passing 
Arguments by Address, Scope visibility and lifetime o f a variable, Local and Global Variable,  
 
Unit 8 : Structure and Union  (5 Hrs. ) 
Introduction, Array of structure, Passing structure to function, Passing array of structure to 
function, Structure within structure ( Nested Structure), Union, Pointer to struc ture  
 
Unit 9 : Pointers ( 6 Hrs. ) 
Introduction, The & and * operator, Declaration of pointer, Chain of Pointers, Pointer 
Arithmetic, Pointers and Arrays, Pointers and Character Strings, Array of Pointers, Pointers as 
Function Arguments, Function Returning po inters, Pointers and Structures, Dynamic Memory 
Allocation  
 
Unit 10 : File Handling in C  (4 Hrs. ) 
Concept of File, Opening and closing of File, Input Output Operations in File, Random access in 
File, Error Handling in File s 
 
Unit 11 : Introduction to Graphic s (3 Hrs. ) 
Concepts of Graphics, Graphics Initialization and Modes, Graphics Function  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
This course requires a lot of programming practices. Each topic must be followed by a practical 
session. Some practical sessions include programming to : 
 
• Create, compile and run simple C programs, handle different data types available in C, 
perform arithmetic operations in C, perform formatted input and output operations, 
perform character input and output operations.  
• Perform logical operations, create d ecision making programs, create loops to repeat task.  
• Create user -defined functions, create recursive functions, work with automatic, global 
and static variables, create, manipulate arrays and matrices (single and multi -
dimensional), work with pointes, dyn amically allocate de -allocate storage space during 
runtime, manipulate strings (character arrays) using various string handling functions.  
• Create and use structures and files to keep record of students, employees etc.  
 
Text Books:  
1. Byron Gottfried: "Program ming with C," , Second Edition, McGraw Hill 
Education.  
2. Herbert Schildt, C The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Osborne/McGraw -
Hill Publication.  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Paul Deitel, Harvey Deitel, C: How to Program, Eighth Edition, Pearson 
Publication.  
2. Al Kell ey, Ira Pohl: "A Book on C", Fourth Edition, Pearson Education.  
3. Brian W. Keringhan, Dennis M. Ritchiem, The C programming Language, 
Second Edition, PHI Publication.  
4. Ajay Mittal, Programming in C: A Practical Approach, Pearson Publication  

--- PAGE 13 ---
5 
 5. Stephen G. Kochan,  Programming in C, CBS publishers & distributors.  
6. E. Balagurusamy, Programming in ANSI C, Third Edition, TMH publishing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
6 
 Digital Logic  
 
Course Title: Digital Logic       Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No:  CSC11 6       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit H rs: 3 
Semester: I 
 
Course Description: This course covers the concepts of digital logic and switching networks. 
The course includes the fundamental concepts of boolean algebra and it s application for circuit 
analysis, multilevel gates networks, flip -lops, counters logic devices and synchronous and 
asynchronous sequential logic and digital integrated circuits.  
 
Course Objective s: The main objective of this course is to introduce the ba sic tools for the 
design of digital circuits and introducing methods and procedures suitable for a variety of digital 
design applications.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Binary Systems (6 Hrs.)  
Digital Systems, Binary numbers, Number base conversion, Octal and hexadecimal numbers, 
compliments, Signed Binary numbers, Decimal codes (BCD, 2 4 2 1,8 4 -2 -1,Excess 3, Gray 
Code), Binary Storage and Registers, Binary logic  
 
Unit 2: Boolean algebra and Logic Gates (5 Hrs.)  
Basic and Axiomatic definitions of Boolean al gebra, Basic Theorems and properties of Boolean 
Algebra, Boolean Functions, Logic Operations, Logic Gates, Integrated Circuits  
 
Unit 3: Simplification of Boolean Functions (5 Hrs.)  
K-map, Two and Three variable maps, Four variable maps, product of sum simp lification, 
NAND and NOR implementation, Don't Care conditions, Determinant and selection of Prime 
Implicants  
 
Unit 4: Combinational Logic (5 Hrs.)  
Design Procedure, Adders, Subtractors, Code Conversions, Analysis Procedure, Multilevel 
NAND and NOR Circuit s, Exclusive -OR Circuits  
 
Unit 5: Combinational Logic with MSI and LSI (8 Hrs.)  
Binary Parallel Adder and Subtractor, Decimal Adder, Magnitude Comparator, Decoders and 
Encoders, Multiplexers, Read -only-Memory (ROM), Programmable Logic Array (PLA), 
Programm able Array Logic (PAL)  
 
Unit 6: Synchronous and Asynchronous Sequential Logic (10 Hrs.)  
Flip-Flops, Triggering of flip -flops, Analysis of clocked sequential circuits, Design with state 
equations and state reduction table, Introduction to Asynchronous circu its, Circuits with latches.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
7 
 Unit 7: Registers and Counters (6 Hrs.)  
Registers, Shift registers, Ripple Counters, Synchronous Counters, Timing Sequences, The 
memory  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
Students should be able to realize following digital logic circuits a s a part of laboratory work.  
 
• Familiarizations with logic gates  
• Combinatorial Circuits  
• Code Converters  
• Design with Multiplexers  
• Adders and Subtractors  
• Flip-Flops  
• Sequential Circuits  
• Counters  
• Clock Pulse Generator  
 
Text  Books:   
1. M. Morris Mano, “Di gital Logi c & Computer Design”  
 
Reference Books:  
 
1. Brain Holdsworth, “Digital Logic Design”, Elsevier Science.  
2. John Patrick Hayes, “ Introduction to Digital Logic Design”,  Addison -Wesley.  
3. M. Morris Mano and Charles Kime, “Logic and Computer Design Fundamentals”,  
Pearson New International.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
8 
 Mathematics I  
 
Course Title: Mathematics I                   Full Marks: 60 + 40 
Course No: MTH117                   Pass Marks:  24+16  
Nature of the C ourse: Theory                    Credit Hrs:  3 
Semester: I 
 
Course  Description:  The course covers the concepts of functions, limits, continuity, 
differentiation, integration of function of one variable; logarithmic, exponential, applications of 
derivative and antiderivatives, differential equations, vectors and applicati ons, partial derivatives 
and Multiple Integrals.  
 
Course Objectives: The objective of this course is to make students able to  
• understand  and formulate real world problems into mathematical statements.  
• develop solutions to mathematical problems at the lev el appropriate  to the course.  
• describe or demonstrate mathematical solutions either numerically  or graphically.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Function of One Variable ( 5 Hrs.)  
Four ways of representing a function,  Linear mathematical model , Polynomial, Rationa l, 
Trigonometric, Exponential and Logarithmic functions , Combination of functions, Range and 
domain of functions and their Graphs  
 
Unit 2: Limits and Continuity (4 Hr s.) 
Precise definition of Limit, Limits at infinity, Continuity, Horizontal asymptotes, Ve rtical and 
Slant asymptotes  
                                         
Unit 3: Derivatives (4 H rs.) 
Tangents and velocity, Rate of change, Review of derivative, Differentiability of a function, 
Mean value theorem, Indeterminate forms and L’Hospital rule  
                                                                                                                            
Unit 4 : Applications of Derivatives (4  Hrs.)  
Curve sketching, Review of maxima and minima of one variable, Optimization problems, 
Newto n’s method  
                                           
Unit 5: Antiderivatives (5  Hrs.)  
Review of antiderivatives, Rectilinear motion, Indefinite integrals and Net change, Definite 
integral, The Fundamental theorem o f calculus, Improper integrals   
 
Unit 6: Applications of Antiderivatives (5  Hrs.)   
Areas between the curves, Volumes of cylindrical cells, Approximate Integrations, Arc length, 
Area of surface of revolution  
         
 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
9 
 Unit 7: Or dinary Differential Equations (6  Hrs.)  
Introduction, Introduction to  first order equations Separable equations, Linear equations, Second 
order linear differential equations, Non homogeneous linear equations, Method of undetermined 
coefficients  
 
Unit 8: Infinite Sequence and Series (5  Hrs.)  
Infinite sequence and series, Con vergence tests and power series, Taylor’s and Maclaurin’s 
series   
 
Unit 9: Plane and Space Vectors (4  Hrs.)  
Introduction, Applications, Dot product and cross Product, Equations of lines and Planes, 
Derivative and integrals of vector functions, Arc length a nd curvature, Normal and binormal 
vectors, Motion in space  
 
Unit 10: Partial Derivatives and Multiple Integrals ( 3 Hrs.)  
Limit and continuity, Partial derivatives, Tangent planes, Maximum and minimum values, 
Multiple integrals  
 
Text Book  
1. Calculus Early Tr anscendentals, James Stewart, 7E, CENGAGE Learning.  
Reference Book  
1. Calculus Early Transcendentals, Thomas, 12th Editions, Addision Wesley.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
10 
 Physics  
 
Course Title: Physics        Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No.:  PHY11 8       Pass Marks:  24 + 8  + 8 
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hour:  3 
Semester: I 
 
Course Description: This course covers the fundamentals of physics including oscillations, 
electromagnetic theory, and basics of quantum mechanics, band theory, semiconductors and 
unive rsal logic gates and finally physics of manufacturing integrated circuits.  
 
Course Objective s: The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge in physics and 
apply this knowledge for computer science and information technology.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Rotational Dynamics  and Oscillatory Motion (5 H rs.) 
Moment of inertia and torque, Rotational kinetic energy, Conservation of angular momentum, 
Oscillation of spring: frequency, period, amplitude, phase angle and energy  
 
Unit 2: Electric and Magne tic Field (5 H rs.) 
Electric and magnetic field and potential, Force on current carrying wire, magnetic dipole 
moment, Force on a moving charge, Hall effect, Electromagnetic waves  
 
Unit 3: Fu ndamentals of Atomic Theory (8 H rs.) 
Blackbody radiation, Bohr ato m, Spectrum of Hydrogen, Franck -Hertz experiment, de Broglie’s 
hypothesis and its experimental verification, Uncertainty principle and its origin, matter waves 
and the uncertainty principle, group velocity.  
 
Unit 4: M ethods of Quantum Mechanics (5 H rs.) 
Schrodinger theory of quantum mechanics and its application, Outline of the solution of 
Schrodinger equation for H -atom, space quantization and spin, Atomic wave functions  
 
Unit 5: Fundamen tals of Solid State Physics (6 H rs.) 
Crystal structure, Crystal bondi ng, Classical and quantum mechanical free electron model, Bloch 
theorem, Kronig -Penny mode l, Tight -binding approximation, conductors, insulators and 
semiconductors, effective mass and holes.  
 
Unit 6: Semiconducto r and Semiconductor devices (8 H rs.) 
Intrin sic and extrinsic semiconductors, Electrical conductivity of semiconductors, 
Photoconductivity, Metal -metal junction: The contact potential, The semiconductor diode, 
Bipolar junction transistor (BJT), Field effect transistor (FET).  
 
Unit 7: Universal Gates  and Physics of Integrated Circuits (8 Hrs.) 
Universal gates, RTL and TTL gates, Memory circuits, Clock circuits, Semiconductor 
purification: Zone refining, Single crystal growth, Processes of IC production, Electronic 
component fabrication on a chip.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
11 
  
Laboratory Work s: 
Students should able to perform at least one experiment from units 1, 2 and 5, 6, 7. The details of 
the experiment will be provided in the manual.  
 
Text Book s: 
 
1. Garcia Narciso, Damask Arthur,  Physics for Computer Science Students,  Springer -Verlag  
 
Reference Books:  
 
1. Heliday David, Resnick Robert and Walker Gearl,  Fundamentals of Physics,  9th ed., 
John -Wiley and Sons, Inc.   
2. Francis W. Sears, Hugh D. Young, Roger Freedman, Mark Zemansky,  University 
Physics,  Volume 1 & 2, 14th ed., Pearson Publ ication   
3. Knight Randall D.,  Physics for Scientists and Engineers: A Strategic Approach,  3rd ed., 
Pearson Publication   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
12 
 Discrete Structures  
 
Course Title: Discrete Structures             Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No: CSC 165              Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab            Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: II 
 
Course Description:  The course covers fundamental concepts of discrete structure like 
introduce logic, proofs, sets, relations, functions, counting, and pr obability, with an emphasis on 
applications in computer science.  
 
Course Objectives: The main objective of the course is to introduce basic discrete structures, 
explore applications of discrete structures in computer science, understand concepts of Countin g, 
Probability, Relations and Graphs respectively.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1:  Basic Discrete Structures (7  Hrs.)  
1.1. Sets: Sets and Subsets, Power Set, Cartesian Product, Set Operations, Venn Diagram, 
Inclusion -Exclusion Principle, Computer Representation of Sets 
1.2. Functions: Basic Concept, Injective and Bijective Functions, Inverse and Composite 
Functions, Graph of Functions, Functions for Computer Science (Ceiling Function, Floor 
Function, Boolean  Function, Exponential Function ), Fuzzy Sets and Membership 
Func tions, Fuzzy Set Operations  
1.3. Sequences and Summations: Basic Concept of Sequences, Geometric and Arithmetic 
Progression, Single and Double Summation  
 
Unit 2: Integers  and Matrices (6 Hrs.)  
2.1. Integers: Integers and Division, Primes and Greatest Common Divisor,  Extended 
Euclidean Algorithm, Integers and Algorithms, Applications of Number Theory (Linear 
Congruencies, Chinese Remainder Theorem, Computer Arithmetic with Large Integers)  
2.2. Matrices: Zero -One Matrices, Boolean Matrix Operations  
 
Unit 3: Logic and Proof Methods (6 Hrs.)  
3.1. Logic: Propositional Logic, Propositional Equivalences, Predicates and Quantifiers, 
Negation of Quantified Statements, Proof of quantified statements, Nested Quantifiers, 
Rules of Inferences  
3.2. Proof Methods: Basic Terminologies, Proof Method s (Direct Proof, Indirect Proof, Proof 
by Contradiction, Proof By Contraposition, Exhaustive Proofs and Proof by  Cases), 
Mistakes in Proof  
 
Unit 4: Induction and Recursion (5 Hrs.)  
4.1. Induction: mathematical Induction, Strong Induction and Well Ordering, Ind uction in 
General  
4.2. Recursive Definitions and Structural Induction, Recursive Algorithms, Proving 
Correctness of Recursive Algorithms  
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
13 
 Unit 5: Counting and Discrete Probability (9 Hrs.)  
5.1. Counting: Basics of Counting, Pigeonhole Principle, Permutations and Com binations, 
Two Element Subsets, Counting Subsets of a Set, Binomial Coefficients, Generalized 
Permutations and Combinations, Generating Permutations and Combinations  
5.2. Discrete Probability: Introduction to Discrete Probability, Probability Theory, 
Probabilit y Calculation in Hashing, Expected Value and Variance, Randomized 
Algorithms  
5.3. Advanced Counting: Recurrence Relations, Solving Recurrence Relations 
(Homogeneous and Non -Homogeneous equations), Introduction to Divide and Conquer 
Recurrence Relations  
 
Unit 6:  Relations and Graphs (1 2 Hrs.)  
6.1. Relations: Relations and their Properties, N -ary Relations with Applications, 
Representing Relations, Closure of Relations, Equivalence Relations, Partial Ordering  
6.2. Graphs: Graphs Basics, Graph Types, Graph Models, Graph Repr esentation, Graph 
Isomorphism, Connectivity in Graphs, Euler and Hamiltonian Path and Circuits, 
Matching Theory, Shortest Path Algorithm (Dijkstra’s Algorithm), Travelling Salesman 
Problem, Graph Coloring  
6.3. Trees: Introduction and Applications, Tree Traversa ls, Spanning Trees, Minimum 
Spanning Trees (Kruskal’s Algorithm)  
6.4. Network Flows: Graph as Models of Flow of Comodities, Flows, Maximal Flows and 
Minimal Cuts, The Max Flow -Min Cut Theorem  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work consists of implementing the a lgorithms and concepts discussed in the class. 
Student should implement problems with following concepts;  
• Set Operations and Boolean Matrix Operations  
• Primility Testing, Number Theory Algorithms, and Operations on Integers  
• Counting and Some Recursive Alg orithms  
• Algorithms for Relations, Graphs  
  
Text Books:  
1. Kenneth H. Rosen, Discrete mathematics and its applications, Seventh Edition McGraw 
Hill Publication, 2012.  
2. Bernard Kolman, Robert Busby, Sharon C. Ross, Discrete Mathematical Structures, Sixth 
Edition  Pearson Publications, 2015  
3. Joe L Mott, Abraham Kandel, Theodore P Baker, Discrete Mathematics for Computer 
Scientists and Mathematicians, Printice Hall of India, Second Edition, 2008  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Ken Bogart, Scot Drysdale, Cliff Stein, Discrete Mathe matics for Computer Scientists, 
First Edition Addison -Wesley, 2010  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
14 
 Object Oriented Programming  
 
Course Title:  Object Oriented Programming   Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20 
Course N o: CSC166       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8   
Nature of C ourse:  Theory + Lab     Credit  Hrs:  3 
Semester: II 
 
 Course Description:  The course covers the basic concepts of object oriented programming 
using C++ programming language .  
                        
Course Objective s: The main objective of this course is to  understand object oriented 
programming and advanced C++  concepts  such as  composition of objects, operator overloads, 
inheritance and polymorphism, file I/O, exception handling  and templates.  
Course Contents:  
Unit 1:  Introduction to Object Oriented Programming (3 Hrs.)  
Overview of stru ctured programming approach, Object oriented programming approach, 
Characteristics of object oriented languages  
 
Unit 2:  Basics of C++ programming (5 Hrs.)  
C++ Program Structure, Character Set and Tokens, Data Type, Type Conversion, Preprocessor 
Directives , Namespace, Input/Output Streams and Manipulators, Dynamic Memory Allocation 
with new and delete, Control Statements.  
Functions: Function Overloading, Inline Functions, Default Argument, Pass by Reference, 
Return by Reference, Scope and Storage Class.  
Pointers: Pointer variables declaration & initialization, Operators in pointers, Pointers and 
Arrays, Pointer and Function.             
 
Unit 3:  Classes & Objects (8 Hrs.)  
A Simple Class and Object , Accessing members of class, Initialization of class objects:                    
(Constructor, Destructor), Default Constructor, Parameterized Constructor, Copy Constructor,  
The Default Copy Constructor, Objects as Function Arguments, Returning Objects from 
Functions, Structures and Classes, Memory allocation for Obje cts, Static members, Member 
functions defined outside the class.                      
 
Unit 4:  Operator Overloading  (7 Hrs.)  
Fundamental of operator overloading, Restriction on operator overloading, Operator functions as 
a class members, Overloading unary a nd binary operator, Data Conversion (basic to basic, basic 
to user -defined, user -defined to basic, user -defined to user -defined)  
 
Unit 5:  Inheritance  (7 Hrs.)  
Introduction to inheritance, Derived Class and Base Class, Access Specifiers (private, protected,  
and public), Types of inheritance, Public and Private Inheritance, Constructor and Destructor in 
derived classes, Aggregation     
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
15 
 Unit 6:  Virtual Function, Polymorphism, and miscellaneous C++ Features (5 Hrs.)  
Concept of Virtual functions, Late Binding, A bstract class and pure virtual functions, Virtual 
Destructors, Virtual base class, Friend function and Static function, Assignment and copy 
initialization, Copy constructor,  This pointer, Concrete classes, Polymorphism and its roles.  
 
Unit 7:  Function Tem plates and Exception Handling (4 Hrs.)  
Function templates, Function templates with multiple arguments, Class templates, templates and 
inheritance, Exceptional Handling (Try, throw and catch), Use of exceptional handling.  
 
Unit 8:  File handling (6 Hrs.)  
Stream Class Hierarchy for Console Input /Output, Unformatted Input /Output, Formatted Input 
/Output with ios Member functions, Formatting with Manipulators, Stream Operator 
Overloading, File Input/output with Streams, Opening and Closing files, Read/Write fr om File, 
File Access Pointers and their Manipulators, Sequential and Random Access to File, Testing 
Errors during File Operations  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
Students should be able to implement the concepts of Object Oriented Programming using C++ 
language.  
 
Text  Book:   
1. Robert Lafore, Object Oriented Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, SAMS 
publications.  
2. Herbert Schildt, C++ The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill 
Publication.  
 
Reference Books:      
1. Deitel and Deitel, C++ How to Program, Third  Edition, Pearson Publication.  
2. Joyce Farrell, Object -oriented programming using C++, Fourth Edition, Cengage 
Learning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
16 
 Microprocessor  
 
Course Title: Microprocessor             Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No: CSC16 7              Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab            Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: II 
 
Course Description:   This course contains of fundamental concepts of computer organization, 
basic I/O interfaces and Interrupts operations.  
 
Course Objectives:  The course obje ctive is to introduce the operation, programming and 
application of microprocessor.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit1: Introduction (4 Hrs.)  
Introduction to Microprocessor, Components of a Microprocessor: Registers, ALU and control & 
timing, System bus (data, addres s and control bus), Microprocessor systems with bus 
organization  
 
Unit 2: Basic Architecture (7 Hrs.)  
Microprocessor Architecture and Operations, Memory, I/O devices,  Memory and I/O operations, 
8085 Microprocessor Architecture, Address, Data And Control Bu ses, 8085 Pin Functions, 
Demultiplexing of Buses, Generation Of Control Signals  
 
Unit 3: Instruction Cycle (3 Hrs.)  
Fetch Operation and Timing Diagram; Execute Operation and Timing Diagram, Instruction 
Cycle,  Machine Cycle, T -States, T -States, Memory Inter facing  
 
Unit 4: Assembly Language Programming (10 Hrs.)  
Assembly instruction format, Instruction Types, Mnemonics, Operands, Macro assemblers, 
Linking, Assembler directives, Addressing Modes, Simple sequence programs, Flags, Branch, 
Jumps, While -Do, Repea t-Until, If -Then -Else and Multiple If -then Programs, Debugging  
 
Unit 5: Basic I/O, Memory R/W and Interrupt Operations (6 Hrs.)  
Memory Read, Memory Write, I/O Read, I/O Write, Direct Memory Access, Interrupt, Types, 
Interrupt Masking  
 
Unit 6: Input/ Outpu t Interfaces (6 Hrs.)  
Interfacing Concepts, Ports, Interfacing Of I/O Devices, Interrupts In 8085, Programmable 
Interrupt Controller 8259A, Programmable Peripheral Interface 8255A  
 
Unit 7: Advanced Microprocessors (9 Hrs.)  
8086: logical block diagram and s egments, 80286: Architecture, Registers, (Real/Protected 
mode), Privilege levels, descriptor cache, Memory access in GDT and LDT, multitasking, 
addressing modes, flag register 80386: Architecture, Register organization, Memory access in 
protected mode, Pag ing 

--- PAGE 25 ---
17 
 Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work includes Assembly language programming using 8085/8086/8088 trainer 
kit. The programming should include: Arithmetic operation, base conversion, conditional 
branching etc. The lab work list may include following con cepts:  
1. Assembly language program using 8085 microprocessor kit.  
2. Use of all types of instructions and addressing modes.  
3. Arrays and the concept of Multiplications and Division operations on Microprocessor.  
4. Assembly language programming, using any types of As sembler, including the different 
functions of Int 10h, and 12h  
 
Text  Books:  
1. Ramesh S.Gaonkar, Microprocessor Architecture, Programming, and Applications with 
8085, Prentice Hall  
 
Reference B ooks:  
1. A.P.Malvino and J.A.Brown, Digital Computer Electronics, 3rd  Edition, Tata McGraw 
Hill D.V.Hall, Microprocessors and Interfacingv – Programming and Hardware, McGraw 
Hill 
2. 8000 to 8085 Introduction to 8085 Microprocessor for Engineers and Scientists, 
A.K.Gosh, Prentice Hall  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
18 
 Mathematics II  
 
Course Title: Mathematics II                Full Marks: 60 + 40 
Course No: MTH168                Pass Marks: 24 + 16 
Nature of the C ourse: Theory       Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: II 
 
Course Description:  The course contains concepts and techniques of linear alge bra. The course 
topics include systems of linear equations, determinants, vectors and vector spaces, eigen  values 
and eigenvectors, and singular value decomposition of a matrix.  
 
Course Objectives: The main objective of the course is to make familiarize wi th the concepts 
and techniques of linear algebra, solve system of linear equation with Gauss -Jordon method, to 
impart knowledge of vector space and subspace, eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix and 
get the idea of  diagonalization of a matrix, linear p rogramming , Group, Ring, and Field.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Linear Equations in Linear Algebra ( 5 Hrs.)  
System of linear equations, Row reduction and Echelon forms, Vector equations, The matrix 
equations A x = b, Applications of linear system, Linear inde pendence                   
 
Unit 2:  Transformation (4  Hrs.)  
Introduction to linear transformations, the matrix of a linear Transformation, Lin ear models in 
business, science , and engineering  
 
Unit 3: Matrix Algebra (5  Hrs)  
Matrix operations, The inverse o f a matrix, Characterizations of invertible matrices, Partitioned 
matrices, Matrix factorization, The Leontief input output model, Subspace of Rn, Dimension and 
rank                 
 
Unit 4: De terminants (4  Hrs.)  
Introduction, Properties, Cramer’s rule, Vo lume and linear transformations                                                                                        
 
Unit 5: Vector Spaces (5  Hrs.)  
Vector spaces and subspaces, Null spaces, Column spaces, and Linear transformations, Linearly 
independent  sets: Bases, Coordinate systems              
 
Unit 6: Vector Space Continued (4  Hrs.)  
Dimension of vector space and Rank, Change of basis, Applications to difference equations, 
Applications to Markov Chains  
 
Unit 7: Eigenvalues and Eigen Vectors (5  Hrs.)  
Eigenvectors and Eigenvalues, The characteristic equations, Diagonalization, Eigenvectors and 
linear trans formations, Complex eigenvalues , Discrete dynamical systems, Applications to 
differential equations  
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
19 
 Unit 8: Orthogonality and Least Squares (5  Hrs.)  
Inner product, Length, and orthoganility, Orthogonal sets, Orthogonal projections, The Gram -
Schmidt process, Least squares problems, Application to linear models, Inner product spaces, 
Applications of inner product spaces  
 
Unit 9: Groups and Subgroups (5  Hrs.)  
 Binary Operations, Groups, Subgroups, Cyclic Groups  
 
Unit 10: Rings and Fields (4  Hrs.)   
Rings and Fields, Integral domains  
 
Text Books:  
1. Linear Algebra and Its Applications, David C. Lay, 4th Editio n, Pearson Addison Wesley . 
2. Linear Algebra and Its A pplications, Gilbert Strang, 4th Edition, Addison, CENGAGE 
Learning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 28 ---
20 
 Statistics I  
 
Course Title: Statistics I                Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No: STA169                Pass Marks: 24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course : Theory + Lab      Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: II 
 
Course Description:  This course contains basics of statistics, descriptive statistics, probability, 
sampling, random variables and mathematical expectations, probability distribution, correlation 
and regressi on. 
 
Course Objectives: The main objective of this course is to impart the knowledge of descriptive 
statistics, correlation, regression, sampling, theoretical as well as applied knowledge of 
probability and some probability distributions . 
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction (4 Hrs.)  
Basic concept of statistics; Application of Statistics in the field of Computer Science &          
Information technology; Scales of measurement; Variables; Types of Data; Notion of a statistical 
population  
 
Unit 2: Descript ive Statistics (6 Hrs.)    
Measures of central tendency; Measures of dispersion; Measures of skewness; Measures of 
kurtosis; Moments; Steam and leaf display; five number summary; box plot  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and I T 
 
Unit 3:  Introduction to Probability (8 Hrs.)  
Concepts of probability; Definitions of probability; Laws of probability; Bayes theorem; prior and 
posterior probabilities  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Unit 4:   Sa mpling (3 Hrs.)  
Definitions of population; sample survey vs. census survey; sampling error and non sampling 
error; Types of sampling  
 
5. Random Variables and Mathematical Expectation (5 Hrs.)  
Concept of a random variable; Types of random variables; Probab ility distribution of a random 
variable; Mathematical expectation of a random variable; Addition and multiplicative theorems 
of expectation  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 29 ---
21 
 Unit 6 :  Probability Distributions (12 Hrs .) 
Probability distribution function , Joint probability distribution of two random variables; Discrete 
distributions: Bernoulli trial, Binomial and Poisson distributions; Continuous distribution: Normal 
distributions; Standardization of normal distribution ; Normal distribution as an approximation of 
Binomial and Poisson distribution; Exponential, Gamma distribution  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Unit 7: Correlation and Linear Regression (7 Hrs.)  
Bivariate data; Bivar iate frequency distribution; Correlation between two variables; Karl 
Pearson’s coefficient of correlation(r); Spearman’s rank correlation; Regression Analysis: Fitting 
of lines of regression by the least squares method; coefficient of determination  
 
Proble ms and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work includes using any statistical software such as Microsoft Excel, SPSS, 
STATA etc. whichever convenient using Practical problems to be covered in the Comp uterized 
Statistics laboratory  
Practical problems  
S. No.  Title of the practical problems  
 No. of 
practical 
problems  
1 Computation of measures of central tendency (ungrouped and grouped data) 
Use of an appropriate measure and interpretation of results and computation 
of partition Values  1 
 
2 Computation measures of dispersion (ungrouped and grouped data) and 
computation of coefficient of variation.  1 
3 Measures of skewness and kurtosis using method of moments, Measures of 
Skewness using Box and whisker p lot. 2 
4 Scatter diagram, correlation coefficient (ungrouped data) and interpretation. 
Compute manually and check with computer output.  1 
5 Fitting of lines of regression (Results to be verified with computer output)  1 
6 Fitting of lines of regression a nd computation of correlation coefficient, 
Mean residual sum of squares, residual plot.  1 
7 Conditional probability and Bayes theorem  3 
8 Obtaining descriptive statistics of probability distributions  2 
9 Fitting probability distributions in real data (Binomial, Poisson and Normal)  3 
 Total number of  practical problems  15 
 
Text Books:   
1. Michael Baron (2013).  Probability and Statistics for Computer Scientists.  2nd Ed., CRC 
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, A Chapman & Hall Book.  
2. Ronald E. Walpole, Raymo nd H. Myers, Sharon L. Myers, & Keying Ye (2012). 
Probability & Statistics for Engineers & Scientists. 9th  Ed.,  Printice Hall.  
 

--- PAGE 30 ---
22 
 Reference Books:  
1. Douglas C. Montgomery & George C. Ranger (2003). Applied Statistics and Probability 
for Engineers. 3rd Ed., John Willey and Sons, Inc.  
2. Richard A. Johnson (2001).  Probability and Statistics for Engineers. 6th Ed., Pearson 
Education, India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 31 ---
23 
 Data Structures and Algorithms  
 
Course Title: Data Structures and Algorithms            Full Marks : 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No: CSC211                Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab             Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester:  III 
 
Course Description:  This course includes the basic foundations in of data structures and 
algorithms.  This course c overs concepts of various data structures like stack, queue, list, tree and 
graph. Additionally, the course includes idea of sorting and searching.  
 
Course Objectives:  
• To introduce data abstraction and data representation in memory  
• To describe, design and use of elementary data structures such as stack, queue, linked list, 
tree and graph  
• To discuss decomposition of complex programming problems into manageable sub -
problems  
• To introduce algorithms and their complexity  
 
Course Contents : 
Unit 1: Introduction to  Data Structures & Algorithms (4  Hrs.)                                                                    
1.1 Data types, Data structure and Abstract date type  
1.2 Dynamic memory allocation in C  
1.3 Introduction to Algorithms  
1.4 Asymptotic notations and common functions  
 
Unit 2: Stack (4  Hrs.) 
2.1 Basic Concept of Stack, Stack as an ADT, Stack Operations, Stack Applications  
2.2 Conversion from infix to postfix/prefix expression, Evaluation of postfix/ prefix 
expressions  
 
Unit 3: Queue (4  Hrs.) 
3.1 Basic Concept of Queue, Queue as a n ADT, Primitive Operations in Queue  
3.2 Linear Queue, Circular Queue, Priority Queue, Queue Applications  
 
Unit 4: Recursion (3  Hrs.) 
4.1 Principle of Recursion, Comparison between Recursion and Iteration, Tail Recursion  
4.2 Factorial, Fibonacci Sequence,  GCD,  Towe r of Hanoi(TOH)  
4.3 Applications and Efficiency of Recursion  
 
Unit 5: Lists (8  Hrs.) 
5.1 Basic Concept, List and ADT, Array Implementation of Lists, Linked List  
5.2 Types of Linked List: Singly Linked List, Doubly Linked List, Circular Linked List.  
5.3 Basic operations in Linked List: Node Creation, Node Insertion and Deletion from 
Beginning, End and Specified Position  
5.4 Stack and Queue as Linked List  

--- PAGE 32 ---
24 
 Unit 6: Sorting (8  Hrs.) 
6.1 Introduction and Types of sorting: Internal and External sort  
6.2 Comparison Sorting Algorithms: Bubb le, Selection and Insertion Sort, Shell Sort  
6.3 Divide and Conquer Sorting: Merge, Quick and Heap Sort  
6.4 Efficiency of Sorting Algorithms  
 
Unit 7: Searching and Hashing (6  Hrs.) 
7.1 Introduction to Searching, Search Algorithms: Sequential Search, Binary Search  
7.2 Efficiency of  Search Algorithms  
7.3 Hashing : Hash Function and Hash Tables, Collision Resolution Techniques  
 
Unit 8 : Trees and Graphs   (8  Hrs.) 
8.1 Concept and Definitions, Basic Operations in Binary Tree, Tree Height, Level and Depth  
8.2 Binary Search Tree, Insertio n, Deletion, Traversals, Search in BST  
8.3 AVL tree and Balancing algorithm, Applications of Trees  
8.4 Definition and Representation of Graphs, Graph Traversal, Minimum Spanning Trees: 
Kruskal and Prims Algorithm  
8.5 Shortest Path Algorithms: Dijksrtra Algorithm  
 
Labo ratory Work s: 
The laboratory work consists of implementing  the algorithms  and data structures studied in the 
course. Student should imp lement at least following concepts;  
• Dynamic memory allocation and deallocation strategies  
• Stack operations and Queue oper ations  
• Array and Linked List implementation of List  
• Linked List implementation of Stack and Queues  
• Sorting, Searching and Hashing algorithms  
• Binary Search Trees and AVL Tress  
• Graph Representation, Spanning Tree and Shortest Path Algorithms  
 
Text Books : 
1. Y Langsam , MJ  Augenstein and A.M , Tanenbaum  Data Structures using C and C++ , 
Prentice Hall India, Second Edition 2015  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Leen Ammeral, Programmes and Data Structures in C, Wiley Professional       
Computting  
2. G.W Rowe, Introduction to Data S tructure and Algroithms with C  and C++ , prentice 
Hall  India  
3. R.L Kruse, B.P. Leung, C.L. Tondo, Data Structure and Program Design in C Prentice -
Hall India  
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 33 ---
25 
 Numerical Method  
 
Course Title: Numerical Method       Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20 
Course No.:  CSC 212                    Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the C ourse:  Theory + Lab    Credit Hrs: 3   
Semester: III 
 
Course Description : This course contains the concepts of numerical method techniques for 
solving linear and nonlinear equations, interpolation  and regression , differentiation and 
integration, and partial differential equations.  
 
Course Objectives : The main objective of the course is to provide  the knowledge of numerical  
method techniques for mathematical modeling .   
 
Course Content : 
Unit 1:  Solu tion of Nonlinear Equations (8  Hrs.) 
1.1 Errors in Numerical Calculations, Sources of Errors, Propagation of Errors, Review of 
Taylor's Theorem  
1.2 Solving Non -linear Equations by Trial and Error method, Half -Interval method and 
Convergence, Newton's method and Co nvergence, Secant method and Convergence, 
Fixed point iteration and its convergence, Newton's method for calculating multiple roots, 
Horner's method  
  
 Unit 2 : Interpolation and Regression  (8 Hrs.) 
2.1 Interpolation vs Extrapolation, Lagrange's Interpolation, Newton's Interpolation using 
divided differences, forward differences and backward differences, Cubic spline 
interpolation  
2.2 Introduction of Regression, Regression vs Interpolation, Least squares method, Linear 
Regression, Non -linear Regress ion by fitting Ex ponential and P olynomial  
 
Unit 3:  Numerical Differentiation and Integration (8  Hrs.) 
3.1 Differentiating Continuous Functions (Two -Point and Three -Point Formula), 
Differentiating Tabulated Functions by using Newton’s Differences, Maxima and minima 
of Tabulated  Functions  
3.2 Newton -Cote's Quadrature Formulas, Trapezoidal rule, Multi -Segment Trapezoidal rule, 
Simpson's 1/3 rule, Multi -Segment Simpson's 1/3 rule, Simpson's 3/8 rule, Multi -
Segment Simpson's 3/8 rule, Gaussian integration algorithm, Romberg integration  
 
Unit 4:  Solving System of Linear Equations  (8 Hrs.) 
4.1 Review of the existence of solutions and properties of matrices, Gaussian elimination 
method, pivoting, Gauss -Jordan method, Inverse of matrix using Gauss -Jordan  method  
4.2 Matrix factorization and Solving  System of Linear Equations by using Dolittle and 
Cholesky's algorithm  
4.3 Iterative Solutions of System of Linear Equations, Jacobi Iteration Method, Gauss -Seidal 
Method  

--- PAGE 34 ---
26 
 4.4 Eigen values and eigen vectors problems, Solving eigen value problems using power 
method.  
 
Unit 5: Solution of O rdinary Differential Equations (8  Hrs.) 
5.1 Review of differential equations, Initial value problem, Taylor series method, Picard's 
method, Euler's method and its accuracy, Heun's method, Runge -Kutta methods  
5.2 Solving System of ordinary di fferential equations, Solution of the higher order equa tions, 
Boundary value problems, Shooting method and its algorithm  
 
Unit 6: Solution of Partial Differential E quations ( 5 Hrs .) 
6.1 Review of partial differential equations, Classification of partial differ ential equation, 
Deriving difference equations, Laplacian equation and Poisson's equation, engineering 
examples  
 
Laboratory W orks:    
The laboratory exercise should consist program development and testing of  non-linear equations, 
system of linear equations,  interpolation, numerical integration and differentation,  linear 
algebraic equations, ordinary and partial differential equations. Numerical solutions using C or 
Matlab . 
 
Text Books:  
1. W. Chency and D. Kincaid, " Numerical Mathematics and Computing ", 7thEditio n, 
Brooks/Cole Publishing Co, 2012  
2. C.F. Gerald and P.O. Wheatley, " Applied Numerical Analysis ", 9thEdition, Addison 
Wesl ey Publishing Company, New York, 2011  
 
Reference Books:  
1. E. Balagurusamy, “Numerical Methods”, Tata McGraw -Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 
New Delhi, 1999  
2. W.H. Press, B.P. Flannery et al., " Numerical Recipes : Art of Scientific Computing ", 3rd  
Edition, Cambridge Press, 2007 . 
3. J. M. Mathews and K. Fink, “Numerical Methods using MATLAB “, 4rd Edition, Prentice 
Hall Publication, 2004  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 35 ---
27 
 Computer Architecture  
 
Course Title: Computer Architecture            Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No:  CSC213                Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab            Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: III 
 
Course Description:  This course  includes concepts of instruction set architecture, organization 
or micro -architecture, and system architecture.  The instruction set architecture includes 
programmer’s abstraction of computer. The micro -architecture consist internal representation of 
compu ters at register and functional unit level. The system architecture includes organization of 
computers at the cache and bus level.     
. 
Course Objectives : 
• Discuss representation of data and algorithms used to perform operations on data  
• Demonstrate differen t operations in terms of Micro -operations  
• Explain architecture of basic computer and micro -programmed control unit  
• Understand and memory and I/O organization of a typical computer system  
• Demonstrate benefits of pipelined systems  
 
Course Contents : 
Unit 1: Data Representation (4  Hrs.) 
1.1. Data Representation: Binary Representation, BCD, Alphanumeric Representation, 
Complements, Fixed Point representation, Representing Negative Numbers, Floating 
Point Representation, Arithmetic with Complements, Overflow, Detecti ng Overflow  
1.2. Other Binary Codes: Gray Code, self Complementing Code, Weighted Code, Excess -3 
Code, EBCDIC  
1.3. Error Detection Codes: Parity Bit, Odd Parity, Even parity, Parity Generator & Checker  
 
Unit 2: Register Transfer and Microoperations (5  Hrs.) 
2.1. Microope ration, Register Transfer Language, Register Transfer, Control Function  
2.2. Arithmetic Microoperations: Binary Adder, Binary Adder -subtractor, Binary 
Incrementer, Arithmetic Circuit  
2.3. Logic Microoperations, Hardware Implementation, Applications of Logic 
Microope rations.  
2.4. Shift Microoperations: Logical Shift, Circular shift, Arithmetic Shift, Hardware 
Implementation of Shifter.  
 
Unit 3: Basic Computer Organization and Design (8  Hrs.) 
3.1. Instruction Code, Operation Code, Stored Program Concept  
3.2. Registers and memory of B asic Computer, Common Bus System for Basic 
Computer.  
3.3. Instruction Format, Instruction Set Completeness,  Control Unit of Basic Computer, 
Control Timing Signals  

--- PAGE 36 ---
28 
 3.4. Instruction Cycle of Basic computer, Determining Type of Instruction, Memory 
Reference Instructio ns, Input -Output Instructions, Program Interrupt & Interrupt 
Cycle.  
3.5. Description and Flowchart of Basic Computer  
 
Unit 4:   Microprogrammed Control  (4 Hrs.) 
4.1. Control Word, Microprogram, Control Memory, Control Address Register, 
Sequencer  
4.2. Address Sequencing, Conditional Branch, Mapping of Instructions, Subroutines, 
Microinstruction Format, Symbolic Microinstructions  
4.3. Design of Control Unit  
 
Unit 5:  Central Processing Unit (4  Hrs.) 
5.1.  Major Components of CPU, CPU Organization  
5.2.  Instruction Formats, Addressing Mod es, Data Transfer and manipulation, Program 
Control, Subroutine Call and Return, Types of Interrupt  
5.3. RISC vs CISC, Pros and Cons of RISC and CISC, Overlapped Register Windows  
 
Unit 6: Pipelining (6  Hrs.) 
6.1. Parallel Processing, Multiple Functional Units, Flynn ’s Classification  
6.2. Pipelining: Concept and Demonstration with Example, Speedup Equation, Floating 
Point addition and Subtraction with Pipelining  
6.3. Instruction Level Pipelining: Instruction Cycle, Three & Four -Segment Instruction 
Pipeline, Pipeline Conflicts a nd Solutions  
6.4. Vector Processing, Applications, Vector Operations, Matrix Multiplication  
 
Unit 7: Computer Arithmetic (6  Hrs.) 
7.1. Addition and Subtraction with Signed Magnitude Data, Addition and Subtraction with 
Signed 2’s Complement Data  
7.2. Multiplication of Sig ned Magnitude Data, Booth Multiplication, Division of Signed 
magnitude Data, Divide Overflow  
 
Unit 8: Input Output Organization (4  Hrs.) 
8.1. Input -Output Interface: I/O Bus and Interface Modules, I/O vs . Memory Bus, Isolated 
vs. Memory -Mapped I/O  
8.2. Asynchronous Data Transfer: Strobe, Handshaking  
8.3. Modes of Transfer: Programmed I/O, Interrupt -Initiated I/O, Direct memory Access  
8.4. Priority Interrupt: Polling, Daisy -Chaining, Parallel Priority Interrupt  
8.5. Direct Memory Access, Input -Output Processor, DMA vs . IOP 
 
Unit 9:  Memory Organization (4  Hrs.) 
9.1 Memory Hierarchy, Main Memory, RAM and ROM Chips, Memory address Map, 
Memory Connection to CPU, Auxiliary Memory (magnetic Disk, Magnetic Tape)  
9.1 Associative Memory: Hardware Organization, Match Logic, Read Operation, Write 
Oper ation  
9.1 Cache Memory: Locality of Reference, Hit & Miss Ratio, Mapping, Write Policies  

--- PAGE 37 ---
29 
 Laboratory Work s: 
The laboratory work includes implement ing and simulating  the algorithms , studied in the course, 
by using high level languages like C or VHDL. The laborat ory works should include at least 
following concepts;   
• Simulate features like overflow, data representation by using VHDL  
• Simulate design of different units by using VHDL  
• Simulate pipelining by using VHDL  
• Implement algorithms for computer arithmetic using high level language like C or C++  
 
Text Book s: 
1. M. Morris Mano, “Computer System Architecture”, Prentice -Hall of India, Pvt. Ltd., 
Third edition, 2007  
 
References  Books:  
1. William Stallings, “Computer Organization and Architecture”, Prentice -Hall of India, 
Pvt. Ltd., Seventh edition, 2005.  
2. Vincent P. Heuring and Harry F. Jordan, “Computer System Design and Architecture”, 
Prentice -Hall of India, Pvt. Ltd., Second edition, 2003.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 38 ---
30 
 Computer Graphics  
 
Course Title: Computer Graphics       Full Marks : 60 + 20 + 20 
Course no:  CSC 214       Pass Marks : 24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course : Theory + Lab      Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester:  III      
 
Course Description : The course covers  concepts of graphics hardware, software, and 
applications, data structu res for representing 2D and 3D geometric objects, drawing algorithms 
for graphical objects, techniques for representing and manipulating geometric objects, 
illumination and lighting models, and concept  of virtual reality.  
 
Course Objectives : The objective of this course is to understand the theoretical foundation as 
well as the practical applications of 2D and 3D graphics.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction of Computer Graphics  (3 Hrs.)  
1.1 A Brief Overview of Computer Graphics, Areas of Applications.  
1.2 Graph ics Hardware: Display Technology, Architecture of Raster -Scan 
Displays,Vect or Displays, Display Processors , Hard copy device.  Input Devices . 
1.3 Graphics Software: Software standards, Need of machine independent graphics 
language.  
Unit 2: Scan Conversion Algo rithm  (6 Hrs.) 
2.1 Scan Converting a Point and a straight Line: DDA Line Algorithm,  Bresenham’s Line 
Algorithm  
2.2 Scan Converting Circle and Ellipse :Mid Point Circle and Ellipse Algorithm  
2.3 Area Filling: Scan Line Polygon fill Algorithm,  Inside -outside Test,  Scan line fill of 
Curved Boundary area, Boundary -fill and Flood -fill algorithm  
 
Unit 3: Two -Dimensional Geometric Transformations  (5 Hrs.)  
3.1  Two-Dimensional  translation, Rotation,  Scaling,  Reflection and S hearing  
3.2  Homogeneous Coordinate and 2D Composite Tr ansformations. Transformation 
between Co -ordinate Systems.  
3.3 Two Dimensional Viewing: Viewing pipeline,  Window to viewport coordinate 
transformation  
3.4 Clipping : Point,  Lines(Cohen Sutherland line clipping,  Liang -Barsky Line Clipping) , 
Polygon Clipping(Sutherl and Hodgeman polygon clipping)  
 
Unit 4: Three -Dimensional Geometric Transformation  (5 Hrs.) 
4.1 Three -Dimensional  translation, Rotation,  Scaling,  Reflection and S hearing  
4.2 Three -Dimensional  Composite Transformations  
4.3 Three -Dimensional Viewing:  Viewing pipeli ne, world to screen viewing 
transformation, Projection concepts(Orthographic, parallel,  perspective projections)  
 
Unit 5: 3D Objects Representation  (7 Hrs .) 
5.1 Representing Surfaces: Boundary and Space partitioning  

--- PAGE 39 ---
31 
 5.1.1 Polygon Surface:  Polygon tables , Surface normal and S patial orientati on of 
surfaces, Plane equations , Polygon meshes  
5.1.2 Wireframe Representation  
5.1.3 Blobby Objects  
5.2 Representing Curves: Parametric Cubic Curves,  Spline Representation,  Cubic spline 
interpolation, Hermite Curves,  Bezier and B -spline Curve and surface  
5.3 Quadric Surface: Sphere and Ellipsoid  
 
Unit 6:  Solid Modeling  (4 Hrs .) 
6.1 Sweep ,Boundary and Spatial -Parti tioning  Representation  
6.2 Binary Space Partition Trees (BSP)  
6.3 Octree Representation  
 
Unit 7: Visible Surface Detections  (5 Hr s.) 
7.1 Image Space  and Object Space Techniques   
7.2 Back Face Detection, Depth Buffer (Z -buffer), A -Buffer and Scan -Line Algorithms.   
7.3 Depth Sortin g Method (Painter’s Algorithm)  
7.4 BSP tree Method, O ctree and Ray Tracing  
 
Unit 8: Illumination Models and Surface Rendering Technique s (5 Hr s.) 
8.1 Basic Illumination Models: Am bient light, Diffuse reflection , Specular reflection and 
Phong model  
8.2 Intensity attenuation  and Color consideration ,Transparency,  Shadows  
8.3 Polygon Rendering Methods : Constant intensity shading, Gouraud shading , P hong 
Shading and Fast Phong Shading  
 
Unit 9: Introduction to Virtual Reality (2 Hrs.) 
9.1 Concept of Virtual reality   
9.2 Virtual Reality Components of VR System, Types of VR System, 3D Position 
Trackers, Navigati on and Manipulation Interfaces  
9.3 Application of VR  
 
Unit 10: Introduction to OpenGL  (3 Hrs .) 
1.1 Introduction, C allback functions,  Color commands, D rawings pixels, lines, polygons 
using OpenGL, Viewing and Lighting  
  
Laboratory Work s: 
The laboratory course consists of implementing following algorithms using  high level languages  
and OpenGL . 
1. DDA Line Algorithm  
2. Bresenham ’s line drawing algorithm  
3. Mid Point  Circle Algorithm  
4. Mid Point Ellipse Algorithm  
5. Basic transformation on 2D including Translation, Rotation and Scaling  
6. Simple 3D Object  with basic transformations i ncluding Translation, Rotation and 
Scaling  

--- PAGE 40 ---
32 
 7. Clipping  
8. Hidden surface removal  
9. Basic Drawing Techniques in OpenGL  
 
Text B ooks:  
1. Donald Hearne and M.  Pauline Baker, “Computer Graphics, C Versions.” Prentice Hall  
 
Reference Books:  
1. J.D. Foley, S.K. Feiner and J.F.  Hughes, “Computer Graphics – Principles and Practises”  
(Second Edition in C)  
2. R.K. Maurya, “Computer Graphics with Virtual Reality”, Wiley India  
3. F.S. Hill, Stephen M.Kelley, “Computer Graphics using Open GL” Prentice Hall  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 41 ---
33 
 Statistics II  
 
Course Title: Statistics  II       Full Marks : 60 + 20 + 20 
Course N o: STA215        Pass Marks : 24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of C ourse : Theory + Lab       Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: III 
 
Course Description: The course consists of concepts of sampling, test ing hypothesis, parametric 
and non parametric tests, correlation and regression, experimental designs and stochastic 
processes.  
 
Course Objectives: The main objective of the course is to  acquire  the theoretical as well as 
practical knowledge of estimation,  testing of hypothesis, application of parametric and non -
parametric statistical tests, design of experiments, multiple regression analysis, and basic concept 
of stochastic process with special focus to data/problems related with computer science and 
infor mation technology  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Sampling Distribution and Estimation  (6 Hrs.)  
Sampling distribution; sampling distribution of mean and proportion; Central Limit Theorem;  
Concept of inferential Statistics ; Estimation;  Methods of estimation; Prop erties of good 
estimator; Determination of sample size; R elationship of sample size with desired level of error  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Unit 2:  Testing of hypothesis  (8 Hrs.)  
Types of statistical hypotheses; Power of the test, concept of p -value and use of p  -value in 
decision making , steps used in testing of hypothesis, one sample tests for mean of normal 
population (for known and unknown variance), test for single proportion, test for difference 
between two means and two pro portions, paired sample t -test; Linkage between confidence 
interval and testing of hypothesis  
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
  
Unit 3:  Non parametric test  (8 Hrs.)  
Parametric vs. non -parametric test ; Needs of applying non -parametric tests;  One-sample test: 
Run test, Binomial test , Kolmogorov –Smirnov test; Two independent sample test: Median test, 
Kolmogorov -Smirnov test, Wilcoxon Mann Whitney test, Chi -square test; Paired -sample test: 
Wilcoxon signed r ank test; Cochran’s Q test;  Friedman two way analysis of var iance test; 
Kruskal Wallis test  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Unit 4:  Multiple correlation and regression  (6 Hrs.)  
Multiple and partial correlation; Intro duction of multiple linear regression; Hypothesis testing of 
multiple regression ; Test of significance of regression; T est of individual regression coefficient; 
Model adequacy test s 

--- PAGE 42 ---
34 
  
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Unit 5: Design of e xperiment  (10 Hrs.)  
Experimental design; Basic principles of experimental designs; Com pletely Randomized Design 
(CRD); Randomized Block Design (RBD) ; ANOVA table, Efficiency of RBD relative to CRD, 
Estimations of missing value (one observa tion only), Advantages and disadvantages; Latin 
Square Design (LS D): Statistical analysis of  m ×  m LSD for one observation per experimental 
unit, ANOVA table, Estimation of missing value in LSD (one observation only), Efficiency of 
LSD relative to RBD, Ad vantage and disadvantages.  
 
Problems and illustrative examples related to computer Science and IT  
 
Unit 6:  Stochastic Process  (7 Hrs.)  
Definition and classification;  Markov Process: Markov chain, Matrix approach, Steady - State 
distribution; Counting proces s: Binomial process, Poisson process; Simulation of stochastic 
process; Queuing system: Main component of queuing system, Little’s law; Bernoulli single 
server queuing process: system with limited capacity; M/M/1 system: Evaluating the system 
performance.  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work includes implementing concepts of statistics  using statistical software  tools  
such as SPSS, S TATA etc.  
S. No.  Practical problems  No. of 
practical 
problems  
1 Sampling distribution, random number generation, and compu tation of 
sample size  1 
2 Methods of estimation (including interval estimation)  1 
3 Parametric tests (covering most of the tests)  3 
4 Non-parametric test(covering most of the tests)  3 
5  Partial correlation  1 
6 Multiple regression  1 
7 Design of Expe riments  3 
 Stochastic process  2 
 Total number of  practical problems  15 
 
Text Book s:  
1. Ronald E. Walpole, Raymond H. Myers, Sharon L. Myers, & Keying Ye(2012). 
Probability & Statistics for Engineers & Scientists. 9th  Ed.,  Printice Hall  

--- PAGE 43 ---
35 
  
2. Michael Baron ( 2013).  Probability and Statistics for Computer Scientists.  2nd Ed., CRC 
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, A Chapman & Hall Book  
 
Reference Book s:  
1. Douglas C. Montgomery & George C. Runger  (2003). Applied Statistics and Probability 
for Engineers. 3rd Ed., Jo hn Willey and Sons, Inc . 
 
2. Sidney Siegel, & N. John Castellan, Jr. Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral 
Sciences, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill International Editions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 44 ---
36 
 Theory of Computation  
 
Course Title: Theory of Computa tion                                                    Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No:  CSC262                                                                                 Pass Marks: 24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab                                                      Credit Hr s: 3 
Semester:  IV 
  
Course Description: This course presents a study of Finite State Machines and their languages. 
It covers the details of finite state automata, regular expressions, context free grammars.  More, 
the course includes design of the Push -down automata and Turing Machines.  The course also 
includes basics of undecidabilty and intractability.  
 
Course Objectives: The main objective of the course is to introduce concepts of the models of 
computation and f ormal language approach to computation.  The general objectives of this 
course are to, introduce concepts in automata theory and theory of computation, design different 
finite state machines and grammars and recognizers for different formal languages, iden tify 
different formal language classes and their relationships, determine the decidability and 
intractability of computational problems.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit I: Basic Foundations (3 Hrs .) 
1.1. Review of Set Theory, Logic, Functions, Proofs  
1.2. Automata, Computabi lity and Complexity: Complexity Theory, Computability Theory, 
Automata Theory  
1.3. Basic concepts of Automata Theory: Alphabets, Power of Alphabet, Kleen Closure 
Alphabet, Positive Closure of Alphabet, Strings, Empty String, Substring of a string, 
Concatenation  of strings, Languages, Empty Language  
 
Unit II: Introduction to Finite Automata (8 Hrs .) 
2.1 Introduction to Finite Automata, Introduction of Finite State Machine  
2.2 Deterministic Finite Automata (DFA), Notations for DFA,  Language of DFA, Extended 
Transition Fu nction of DFA Non -Deterministic Finite Automaton (NFA), Notations for 
NFA, Language of NFA, Extended Transition  
2.3 Equivalence of DFA and NFA, Subset -Construction  
2.4 Method for reduction of NFA to DFA, Theorems for equivalence of Language accepted 
by DFA and NFA  
2.5 Finite Automaton with Epsilon Tr ansition (ε - NFA), Notations for ε - NFA, Epsilon 
Closure of a State, Extended Transition Function of ε – NFA, Removing Epsilon 
Transition using the concept of Epsilon Closure, Equivalence of NFA and ε –NFA, 
Equivalence of DFA and ε – NFA  
2.6 Finite State Mac hines with output: Moore machine and Mealy Machines  
 
Unit III: Regular Expressions (6 Hrs .) 
3.1 Regular Expressions, Regular Operators, Regular Languages and their applications, 
Algebraic Rules for Regular Expressions  

--- PAGE 45 ---
37 
 3.2 Equivalence of Regular Expression and Fini te Automata, Reduction of Regular 
Expression to ε – NFA, Conversio n of DFA to Regular Expression  
3.3 Properties of Regular Languages, Pumping Lemma, Application of Pumping Lemma, 
Closure Properties of Regular Lang uages over (Union, Intersection, Complement) 
Minimization of Finite State Machines: Table Filling Algorithm  
 
Unit IV:  Context Free Grammar (9 Hrs .) 
4.1 Introduction to Context Free Grammar (CFG), Components of CFG, Use of CFG, 
Context Free Language (CFL)  
4.2 Types of derivations: Bottomup and Topdown approach , Leftmost and Rightmost, 
Language of a grammar  
4.3 Parse tree and its construction, Ambiguous grammar, Use of parse tree to show ambiguity 
in grammar  
4.4 Regular Grammars: Right Linear and Left Linear, Equivalence of regular grammar and 
finite automata  
4.5 Simplifica tion of CFG: Removal of Useless symbols, Nullable Symbols, and Unit 
Productions, Chomsky Normal Form (CNF), Greibach Normal Form (GNF), Backus -
Naur Form (BNF)  
4.6 Context Sensitive Grammar, Chomsky Hierarchy Pumping Lemma for CFL, Application 
of Pumping Lemma,  Closure Properties of CFL  
  
Unit V:  Push Down Automata (7 Hrs .) 
5.1 Introduction to Push Down Automata (PDA), Representation of PDA, Operations of 
PDA, Move of a PDA, Instantaneous Description for PDA  
5.2 Deterministic PDA, Non Deterministic PDA, Acceptance of strings by PDA, Language 
of PDA  
5.3 Construction of PDA by Final State , Construction of PDA by Empty Stack,  
5.4 Conversion of PDA by Final State to PDA accepting by Empty Stack and vice -versa,  
Conversion of CFG to PDA, Conversion of PDA to CFG  
 
Unit VI:  Turing  Machines (10 Hrs .) 
6.1 Introduction to Turing Machines (TM), Notations of Turing Machine, Language of a 
Turing Machine, Instantaneous Description for Turing Machine, Acceptance of a string 
by a Turing Machines  
6.2 Turing Machine as a Language Recognizer, Turing Machine as a Computing Function, 
Turing Machine with Storage in its State, Turing Machine as a enumerator of stings of a 
language, Turing Machine as Subroutine  
6.3 Turing Machine with Multiple Tracks, Turing Machine with Multiple Tapes, Equivalence 
of Multitap e-TM and Multitrack -TM, Non -Deterministic Turing Machines, Restricted 
Turing Machines: With Semi -infinite Tape, Multistack Machines, Counter Machines  
6.4 Curch Turing Thesis, Universal Turing Machine, Turing Machine and Computers,  
Encoding of Turing Machine, Enumerating Binary Strings, Codes of Turing Machine, 
Universal Turing Machine for encoding of Turing Machine  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 46 ---
38 
 Unit VII: Undecidability and Intractability (5 Hrs .) 
7.1 Computational Complexity, Time and Space complexity of A Turing Machine, 
Intractability  
7.2 Complexity Classes, Problem and its types: Absract, Decision, Optimization  
7.3 Reducibility, Turing Reducible, Circuit Satisfiability, Cook ’s Theorem,   
7.4 Undecidability, Undecidable Problems: Post’s Correspondence Problem, Halting 
Problem and its proof, Undecidab le Problem about Turing Machines  
 
Laboratory Work s:  
The laboratory work consists of design and implementation of finite state machines like  DFA, 
NFA, PDA, and Turing Machine. Students are highly recommended to construct Tokenizers/ 
Lexers over/for some la nguage. St udents are advised to use regex and  Perl (for using regular 
expressions ), or any other higher level language for the laboratory works .   
 
Text Books : 
1. John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, Jeffrey D. Ullman, Introduction to Automata 
Theory, Languages, and Computation,  3rd Edition, Pearson - Addison -Wesley.  
 
Reference Books : 
1. Harry R. Lewis and Christos H. Papadimitriou, Elements of the Theory of Computation,  
2nd Edition, Prentice Hall.  
2. Michael Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 3rd Edition, Thomson Course 
Technology  
3. Efim Kinber, Carl Smith, Theory of Computing: A Gentle introduction , Prentice - Hall.  
4. John Martin , Introduction to Languages and the Theory of Computati on, 3rd Edition, Tata 
McGraw Hill.  
5. Kenneth H. Rosen, Discrete Mathematics and its Applications to Computers Science, 
WCB/Mc -Graw Hill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 47 ---
39 
 Computer Networks  
 
Course Title:  Computer Networks      Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No:  CSC263        Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: IV 
 
Course Description:  This course introduces concept of computer networking and discuss the 
different layers of networking model.  
 
Course Objective:  The main objective of this course is to introduce the understanding of the 
concept of computer networking with its layers, topologies, protocols & standards, IPv4/IPv6 
addressing, Routing and Latest Networking Standards  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to Computer Netw ork (6Hrs .) 
1.1. Definitions, Uses, Benefits  
1.2. Overview of Network Topologies (Star, Tree, Bus,...)  
1.3. Overview of Network Types (PAN, LAN, CAN, MAN,...)  
1.4. Networking Types (Client/Server, P2P)  
1.5. Overview of Protocols and Standards  
1.6. OSI Reference Model  
1.7. TCP/IP Models and its comparison with OSI.  
1.8. Connection and Connection -Oriented Network Services  
1.9. Internet, ISPs, Backbone Network Overview  
 
Unit 2: Physical Layer and Network Media  (4Hrs .) 
2.1. Network Devices: Repeater, Hub, Switch, Bridge, Router  
2.2. Different types of transmission  medias (wired: twisted pair, coaxial, fiber optic, Wireless: 
Radio waves, micro waves, infrared)  
2.3. Ethernet Cable Standards (UTP & Fiber cable standards)  
2.4. Circuit, Message & Packet Switching  
2.5. ISDN: Interface and Standards  
 
Unit 3: Data Link Layer (8Hrs .) 
3.1. Function of Data Link Layer (DLL)  
3.2. Overview of Logical Link Control (LLC) and Media Access Control (MAC)  
3.3. Framing and Flow Control Mechanisms  
3.4. Error Detection and Correction techniques  
3.5. Channel Allocation Techniques (ALOHA, Slotted ALOHA)  
3.6. Ethernet Standards (802 .3 CSMA/CD, 802.4 Token Bus, 802.5 Token Ring)  
3.7. Wireless LAN: Spread Spectrum, Bluetooth, Wi -Fi 
3.8. Overview Virtual Circuit Switching, Frame Relay& ATM  
3.9. DLL Protocol: HDLC, PPP  
 
 

--- PAGE 48 ---
40 
 Unit 4: Network Layer  (10Hrs .) 
4.1. Introduction and Functions  
4.2. IPv4 Addressing & Sub -netting  
4.3. Class -full and Classless Addressing  
4.4. IPv6 Addressing and its Features  
4.5. IPv4 and IPv6 Datagram Formats  
4.6. Comparison of IPv4 and IPv6 Addressing  
4.7. Example Addresses: Unicast, Multicast and Broadcast  
4.8. Routing  
4.8.1.  Introduction and Definition  
4.8.2.  Types of Routing (St atic vs Dynamic, Unic ast vs Multicast, Link State vs  
Distance Vector, Interior vs Exterior)  
4.8.3.  Path Computation Algorithms: Bellman Ford, Dijkstra’s  
4.8.4.  Routing Protocols: RIP, OSPF & BGP  
4.9. Overview of IPv4 to IPv6 Transition Mechanisms  
4.10. Overview of ICMP/ICMPv6&NA Ting  
4.11. Overview of Network Traffic Analysis  
4.12. Security Concepts: Firewall & Router Access Control  
 
Unit 5: Transport Layer  (6Hrs .) 
5.1. Introduction, Functions and Services  
5.2. Transport Protocols: TCP, UDP and Their Comparisons  
5.3. Connection Oriented and Connectionless Services  
5.4. Congestion Control: Open Loop & Closed Loop, TCP Congestion Control  
5.5. Traffic Shaping Algorithms: Leaky Bucket & Token Bucket  
5.6. Queuing Techniques for Scheduling  
5.7. Introduction to Ports and Sockets, Socket Programming  
 
Unit 6: Application Layer  (7Hrs .) 
6.1. Introduction and Functions  
6.2. Web &HTTP  
6.3. DNS and the Query Types  
6.4. File Transfer and Email Protocols: FTP, SFTP, SMTP, IMAP, POP3  
6.5. Overview of Application Server Concepts: Proxy, Web, Mail  
6.6. Network Management: SNMP  
 
Unit 7: Multimedia &Future Networking  (4Hrs .) 
7.1. Overview Multimedia Streaming Protocols: SCTP  
7.2. Overview of SDN and its Features, Data and Control Plane  
7.3. Overview of NFV  
7.4. Overview of NGN  
 
Laboratory W orks : 
The lab activities under this subject should accommodate at least the following ; 
1. Understanding of Netw ork equipment, wiring in details  
2. OS (Ubuntu/CentOS/Windows) installation, practice on basic Networking commands 

--- PAGE 49 ---
41 
 (ifconfig/ipconfig, tcpdump, netstat, dnsip, hostname, route...)  
3. Overview of IP Addressing and sub -netting, static ip setting on Linux/windows m achine,  
testing  
4. Introduction to Packet Tracer, creating of a LAN and connectivity test in the LAN, 
creation of VLAN and VLAN trunking.  
5. Basic Router Configuration, Static Routing Implementation  
6. Implementation of  Dynamic/interior/exterior routing (RIP, OSPF , BGP)  
7. Firewall Implementation, Router Access Control List (ACL)  
8. Packet capture and header analysis by wire -shark (TCP,UDP,IP)  
9. DNS, Web, FTP server configuration (shall use packet tracer, GNS3)  
10. Case Study: Network Operation Center Visit (ISP, Telecom, Univ ersity Network)  
11. LAB Exam, Report and VIVA  
 
Text Books:  
1. Data Communications and Networking, 4th Edition, Behrouz A Forouzan. McGraw -Hill  
2. Computer Networking; A Top Down Approach Featuring The Internet, 2nd Edition, 
Kurose James F., Ross W. Keith PEARSON ED UCATION ASIA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 50 ---
42 
 Operating Systems  
Course Title: Operating Systems             Full Marks:  60+ 20+20  
Course No:  CSC264              Pass Marks:  24+8+8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab            Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: IV 
 
Course Description: This course includes the  basic concepts  of operating system components. It 
consists of process management, deadlocks and process synchronization, memory management 
techniques, File system implementation, and I/O device management principles.  It also includes 
case study on Linux operating system.  
 
Course Objectives : 
• Describe need and role of operating system.  
• Understand OS components such a scheduler, memory manager, file system handlers and 
I/O device managers.  
• Analyze and criticize techniques  used in OS components  
• Demonstrate and simulate algorithms used in OS components  
• Identify algorithms and techniques used in different components of Linux  
 
Course Contents : 
Unit 1: Operating System Overview (4  Hrs.) 
1.1. Definition, Two views of operating system , Evolution of operating system, Types of OS.  
1.2. System Call, Handling System Calls, System Programs, Operating System Structures, 
The Shell, Open Source Operating Systems  
 
Unit 2: Process Management (10  Hrs.) 
2.1. Process vs Program, Multiprogramming, Process Mod el, Process States, Process Control 
Block.  
2.2. Threads, Thread vs Process, User and Kernel Space Threads.  
2.3. Inter Process Communication, Race Condition, Critical Section  
2.4. Implementing Mutual Exclusion: Mutual Exclusion with Busy Waiting (Disabling 
Interrupts, Loc k Variables, Strict Alteration, Peterson’s Solution , Test and Set Lock), 
Sleep and Wakeup, Semaphore, Monitors, Message Passing,  
2.5. Classical IPC problems: Producer Consumer, Sleeping Barber, Dining Philosopher 
Problem  
2.6. Process Scheduling: Goals, Batch System Scheduling (First -Come First -Served, Shortest 
Job First, Shortest Remaining Time Next), Interactive System Scheduling (Round -Robin 
Scheduling, Priority Scheduling, Multiple Queues), Overview of Real Time System 
Scheduling  
 
Unit 3: Process Deadlocks (6  Hrs.) 
3.1. Introduction, Deadlock Characterization, Preemptable and Non -preemptable Resources, 
Resource – Allocation Graph , Conditions for Deadlock  

--- PAGE 51 ---
43 
 3.2. Handling Deadlocks: Ostrich Algorithm, Deadlock prevention , Deadlock Avoidance , 
Deadlock Detection (For Single and Mu ltiple Resource Instances), Recovery From 
Deadlock ( Through Preemption and Rollback)  
 
Unit 4:  Memory Management  (8 Hrs.) 
4.1. Introduction, Monoprogramming vs . Multi -programming, Modelling 
Multiprogramming, Multiprogramming with fixed and variable partitions, Relocation 
and Protection.  
4.2. Memory management (Bitmaps & Linked -list), Memory Allocation Strategies  
4.3. Virtual memory: Paging, Page Table, Page Table Structure, Handling Page Faults, 
TLB’s  
4.4. Page Replacement Algorithms: FIFO, Second Chance, LRU, Optimal, LFU, Cl ock, WS -
Clock, Concept of Locality of Reference, Belady’s Anomaly  
4.5. Segmentation: Need of Segmentation , its Drawbacks, Segmentation with 
Paging(MULTICS)  
 
Unit 5:  File Management (6  Hrs.) 
5.1. File Overview: File Naming, File Structure , File Types, File Access, F ile Attributes, File 
Operations, Single Level, two Level and Hierarchical Directory Systems, File System 
Layout.  
5.2. Implementing Files:  Contiguous allocation, Linked List Allocation, Linked List 
Allocation using Table in Memory, Inodes.  
5.3. Directory Operations, Path Names, Directory Implementation, Shared Files  
5.4. Free Space Management: Bitmaps, Linked List  
 
Unit 6: Device Management (6  Hrs.) 
6.1. Classification of IO devices, Controllers, Memory Mapped IO, DMA Operation, 
Interrupts  
6.2. Goals of IO Software, Handling IO(Prog rammed IO, Interrupt Driven IO, IO using 
DMA), IO Software Layers (Interrupt Handlers, Device Drivers)  
6.3. Disk Structure, Disk Scheduling (FCFS, SSTF, SCAN, CSCAN, LOOK, CLOOK), Disk 
Formatting ( Cylinder Skew, Interleaving, Error handling), RAID  
 
Unit 7: Linu x Case Study (5  Hrs.) 
 7.1 History, Kernel Modules, Process Management, Scheduling, Inter -process 
Communication, Memory Management, File System Management Approaches, Device 
Management Approaches.  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
The laboratory work includes solving pro blems in operating system. The lab work should include 
at least;  
• Learn basic Linux Commands  
• Create process, threads  and implement IPC techniques  
• Simulate process Scheduling algorithms and deadlock detection algorithms  
• Simulate page replacement algorithm s 
• Simulate free space management techniques and disk scheduling algorithms.  

--- PAGE 52 ---
44 
  
Text Book s: 
1. Modern Operating Systems: Andrew S. Tanenbaum, PH1 Publication, Third  edition, 
2008  
 
Reference  Books:  
1. Abraham Silberschatz, Peter Baer Galvin and Greg Gagne, “Operati ng System 
Concepts”, John Wiley & Sons (ASIA) Pvt. Ltd, Seventh edition, 2005.   
2. Harvey M. Deitel, Paul J. Deitel, and David R. Choffnes, “Operating Systems, Prentice 
Hall, Third edition, 2003.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 53 ---
45 
 Database Management Syste m 
 
Course Title:  Database Management System    Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No:  CSC265        Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: IV 
 
Course Description:  The course covers the basic concepts of databases, d atabase system 
concepts and architecture, data modeling using ER diagram, relational model, SQL, relational 
algebra and calculus, normalization, transaction processing, concurrency control,  and database 
recovery.  
 
Course Objective:  The main objective of t his course is to introduce the basic concepts of 
database, data modeling techniques using entity relationship diagram, relational algebra and 
calculus, basic and advanced features SQL, normalization, transaction processing, concurrency 
control, and recover y techniques.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Database and Database Users (2 Hrs.)  
Introduction; Characteristics of the Database Approach; Actors on the Scene ; Workers behind 
the Scene; Advantages of Using the DBMS Approach  
 
Unit 2: Database System – Concepts an d Architecture (3 Hrs.)  
Data Models, Schemas, and Instances; Three -Schema Architecture and Data Independence; 
Database Languages and Interfaces; the Database System Environment; Centralized and 
Client/Server Architectures for DBMSs; Classification of Datab ase Management Systems  
 
Unit 3: Data Modeling Using the Entity -Relational Model (6 Hrs.)  
Using High -Level Conceptual Data Models for Database Design; Entity Types, Entity Sets, 
Attributes, and Keys; Relationship Types, Relationship Sets, Roles, and Structu ral Constraints; 
Weak Entity Types; ER Diagrams, Naming Conventions, and Design Issues; Relationship Types 
of Degree Higher Than Two; Subclasses, Superclasses, and Inheritance; Specialization and 
Generalization; Constraints and Characteristics of Specializ ation and Generalization  
 
Unit 4: The Relational Data Model and Relational Database Constraints (3 Hrs.)  
Relational Model Concepts; Relational Model Constraints and Relational Database Schemas; 
Update Operations, Transactions, and Dealing with Constraint V iolations  
 
Unit 5: The Relational Algebra and Relational Calculus (5 Hrs.)  
Unary Relational Operations: SELECT and PROJECT ; Relational Algebra Operations from Set 
Theory; Binary Relational Operations: JOIN and DIVISION; Additional Relational Operations; 
the Tuple Relational Calculus; the Domain Relational Calculus  
 
Unit 6: SQL (8 Hrs.)  
Data Definition and Data Types; Specifying Constraints ; Basic Retrieval Queries ; Complex 
Retrieval Queries; INSERT , DELETE , and U PDATE  Statements ; Views  

--- PAGE 54 ---
46 
 Unit 7: Relational Da tabase Design (7 Hrs.)  
Relational Database Design Using ER -to-Relational Mapping; Informal Design Guidelines for 
Relational Schemas ; Functional Dependencies ; Normal Forms Based on Primary Keys ; General 
Definitions of Second and Third Normal Forms ; Boyce -Codd Normal Form ; Multivalued 
Dependency and Fourth Normal Form; Properties of Relational Decomposition  
 
Unit 8: Introduction to Transaction Processing Concepts and Theory (4 Hrs.)  
Introduction to Transaction Processing; Transaction and System Concepts ; Desi rable Properties 
of Transactions; Characterizing Schedules  Based on Recoverability; Characterizing Schedules 
Based on Serializability  
 
Unit 9: Concurrency Control Techniques (4 Hrs.)  
Two-Phase Locking Technique; Timestamp Ordering; Multiversion Concurrency  Control ; 
Validation (Optimistic) Techniques and Snapshot Isolation Concurrency Control  
 
Unit 10: Database Recovery Techniques (3 Hrs.)  
Recovery Concepts; NO -UNDO/REDO Recovery Based on Deferred Update; Recovery 
Technique Based on Immediate Update; Shadow Paging; Database Backup and Recovery from 
Catastrophic Failures  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
The laboratory work includes  writing database programs to create and query databases using 
basic and advanced features of structured query language (SQL).  
 
Text Books:  
1. Funda mentals of Database Systems; Seventh Edition; Ramez Elmasri, Shamkant B. Navathe; 
Pearson Education  
2. Database System Concepts; Sixth Edition; Avi Silberschatz, Henry F Korth, S Sudarshan; 
McGraw -Hill 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Database Management Systems; Third Edit ion; Raghu Ramakrishnan, Johannes Gehrke; 
McGraw -Hill 
2. A First Course in Database Systems; Jaffrey D. Ullman, Jennifer Widom; Third Edition; 
Pearson Education Limited  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 55 ---
47 
 Artificial Intelligence  
 
Course Title: Artificial Intelligence                                                     Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20 
Course No:  CSC 266                                                                            Pass Marks: 24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab                                                   Credit H rs: 3 
Semester: IV 
 
Course Description: The course introduces the ideas and techniques underlying the principles 
and design of artificial intelligent systems. The course covers the basics and applications of AI, 
including: design of intelligent  agents, problem solving, searching, knowledge representation 
systems, probabilistic reasoning, neural networks, machine learning and natural language 
processing.  
  
Course Objectives: The main objective of the course is to introduce  fundamental  concepts of  
Artificial Intelligence.  The general objectives are to learn about computer systems that exhibit 
intelligent behavior, design intelligent agents, identify AI problems and solve the problems, 
design knowledge representation and  expert systems, design neu ral networks for solving 
problems, identify different machine learning paradigms and identify their practical applications.  
 
Course Contents :  
Unit I: Introduction (3 Hrs .) 
1.1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) , AI Perspectives: acting and thinking humanly, acting and 
thinking rationally  
1.2. History of AI  
1.3. Foundations of AI  
1.4. Applications of AI  
 
Unit II: Intelligent Agents (4 Hrs .) 
2.1. Introduction of agents, Structure of Intelligent agent, Properties of Intelligent Agents  
2.2. Configuration of Agents, PEAS description of Agents  
2.3. Types of Agents: Simple Reflexive, Model Based, Goal Based, Utility Based.  
2.4. Environment Types: Deterministic, Stochastic, Static, Dynamic, Observable, Semi -
observable, Single Agent, Multi Agent  
 
Unit III: Problem Solving by Searching (9 Hrs .) 
3.1. Definition, Pr oblem as a state space search, Problem formulation, Well -defined 
problems,  
3.2. Solving Problems by Searching, Search Strategies, Performance evaluation of search 
techniques  
3.3. Uninformed Search: Depth First Search, Breadth First Search, Depth Limited Search, 
Iterative Deepening Search, Bidirectional Search  
3.4. Informed Search: Greedy Best first search, A* search, Hill Climbing, Simulated 
Annealing  
3.5. Game playing, Adversarial search techniques, Mini -max Search, Alpha -Beta Pruning.  
3.6. Constraint Satisfaction Problems   
 

--- PAGE 56 ---
48 
 Unit IV:  Knowledge Representation (14 Hrs .) 
4.1. Definition and importance of Knowledge, Issues in Knowledge Representation, 
Knowledge Representation Systems, Properties of Knowledge Representation Systems.  
4.2. Types of Knowledge Representation Systems: Semantic Ne ts, Frames, Conceptual 
Dependencies, Scripts,  Rule Based Systems, Propositional Logic, Predicate Logic  
4.3. Propositional Logic(PL): Syntax, Semantics, Formal logic -connectives, truth tables, 
tautology, validity, well -formed -formula,  Inference using Resolutio n, Backward 
Chaining and Forward Chaining  
4.4. Predicate Logic: FOPL, Syntax, Semantics, Quant ification, Inference with FOPL: By 
converting into PL (Existential and universal instantiation), Unification and lifting, 
Inference using resolution  
4.5. Handling Uncertain  Knowledge, Radom Variables, Prior and Posterior Probability, 
Inference using Full Joint Distribution, Bayes' Rule and its use, Bayesian Networks, 
Reasoning in Belief Networks  
4.6. Fuzzy Logic  
 
Unit V:  Machine Learning (9 Hrs .) 
5.1. Introduction to Machine Learnin g, Concepts of Learning, Supervised, Unsupervised and 
Reinforcement Learning  
5.2. Statistical -based Learning: Naive Bayes Model  
5.3. Learning by Genetic Algorithm  
5.4. Learning with Neural Networks: Introduction, Biological Neural Networks Vs. Artificial 
Neural Networks (ANN), Mathematical Model of ANN, Types of ANN: Feed -forward, 
Recurrent, Single Layered, Multi -Layered, Application of Artificial Neural Networks, 
Learning by Training ANN, Supervised vs. Unsupervised Learning, Hebbian Learning, 
Perceptron Learning, Back -propagation Learning  
 
Unit VI: Applications of AI (6 Hrs .) 
6.1. Expert Systems, Development of  Expert Systems  
6.2. Natural Language Processing: Natural Language Understanding and Natural Language 
Generation, Steps of Natural Language Processing  
6.3. Machine Vision Conc epts 
6.4. Robotics  
 
Laboratory Work s: 
The laboratory work consists of design and implementation of intelligent agents and expert 
systems, searching techniques, knowledge representation systems and machine learning 
techniques. Students are also advised to imple ment Neural Networks, Genetic Algorithms for 
solving practical problems of AI. Students are advised to use LISP, PROLOG, or any  other high 
level language.     
 
Text Books : 
1. Stuart Russel and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach , Pearson  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 57 ---
49 
 Reference Books : 
1. E. Rich, K. Knight, Shivashankar B. Nair, Artificial Intelligence , Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. George F. Luger, Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem 
Solving , Benjamin/Cummings Publication  
3. D. W. Patterson, Artifici al Intelligence and Expert Systems , Prentice Hall.  
4. P. H. Winston, Artificial Intelligence , Addison Wesley.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 58 ---
50Design and Analysis of Algorithms
Course Title: Design and Analysis of Algorithms Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC325 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course Description: This course introduces basic elements of the design and analysis of computer
algorithms. Topics include asymptotic notations and analysis, divide and conquer strategy, greedy
methods,  dynamic  programming,  basic  graph  algorithms,  NP-completeness,  and  approximation
algorithms. For each topic, beside in-depth coverage, one or more representative problems and their
algorithms shall be discussed.
Course Objectives:
Analyze the asymptotic performance of algorithms.
Demonstrate a familiarity with major algorithm design techniques
Apply important algorithmic design paradigms and methods of analysis.
Solve simple to moderately difficult algorithmic problems arising in applications.
Able to demonstrate the hardness of simple NP-complete problems
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Foundation of Algorithm Analysis (4)
1.1.Algorithm and its properties, RAM model, Time and Space Complexity, detailed analysis
of algorithms (Like factorial algorithm), Concept of Aggregate Analysis
1.2.Asymptotic Notations: Big-O, Big-Ω and Big-Ө Notations their Geometrical Interpretation
and Examples.
1.3.Recurrences:  Recursive  Algorithms  and  Recurrence  Relations,  Solving  Recurrences
(Recursion Tree Method, Substitution Method, Application of Masters Theorem)
Unit 2: Iterative Algorithms (4)
12.1. Basic Algorithms: Algorithm for GCD, Fibonacci Number and analysis of their time and
space complexity
12.2. Searching Algorithms: Sequential Search and its analysis
12.3. Sorting Algorithms: Bubble, Selection, and Insertion Sort and their Analysis
Unit 3: Divide and Conquer Algorithms (8)
13.1. Searching Algorithms: Binary Search, Min-Max Finding and their Analysis
13.2. Sorting Algorithms: Merge Sort and Analysis, Quick Sort and Analysis (Best Case, Worst
Case and Average Case), Heap Sort (Heapify, Build Heap and Heap Sort Algorithms and
their Analysis), Randomized Quick sort and its Analysis
13.3. Order Statistics: Selection in Expected Linear Time, Selection in Worst Case Linear Time
and their Analysis.
Unit 4:  Greedy Algorithms (6)
14.1. Optimization  Problems  and  Optimal  Solution,  Introduction  of  Greedy  Algorithms,
Elements of Greedy Strategy.
14.2. Greedy  Algorithms:  Fractional  Knapsack,  Job  sequencing  with  Deadlines,  Kruskal’s
Algorithm, Prims Algorithm, Dijkstra’s Algorithm and  their Analysis
14.3. Huffman  Coding:  Purpose  of  Huffman  Coding,  Prefix  Codes,  Huffman  Coding
Algorithm and its Analysis

--- PAGE 59 ---
51Unit 5:  Dynamic Programming (8)
15.1. Greedy Algorithms vs Dynamic Programming, Recursion vs Dynamic Programming,
Elements of DP Strategy
15.2. DP  Algorithms:  Matrix  Chain  Multiplication,  String  Editing,  Zero-One  Knapsack
Problem,  Floyd  Warshwall  Algorithm,  Travelling  Salesman  Problem  and  their
Analysis.
15.3. Memoization Strategy, Dynamic Programming vs Memoization
Unit 6:  Backtracking (5)
16.1. Concept of Backtracking, Recursion vs Backtracking
16.2. Backtracking Algorithms: Subset-sum Problem, Zero-one Knapsack Problem, N-queen
Problem and their Analysis.
Unit 7: Number Theoretic Algorithms (5)
7.1.Number  Theoretic  Notations,  Euclid’s  and  Extended  Euclid’s  Algorithms  and  their
Analysis.
7.2.Solving Modular Linear Equations, Chinese Remainder Theorem, Primility Testing: Miller-
Rabin Randomized Primility Test and their Analysis
Unit 8:   NP Completeness (5)
8.1.Tractable  and  Intractable  Problems,  Concept  of  Polynomial  Time  and  Super  Polynomial
Time Complexity
8.2.Complexity Classes: P, NP, NP-Hard and NP-Complete
8.3.NP Complete Problems, NP Completeness and Reducibility, Cooks Theorem, Proofs of NP
Completeness (CNF-SAT, Vertex Cover and Subset Sum)
8.4.Approximation Algorithms: Concept, Vertex Cover Problem, Subset Sum Problem
Laboratory Work:
This  course  can  be  learnt  in  effective  way  only  if  we  give  focus  is  given  in  practical  aspects  of
algorithms  and  techniques  discussed  in  class.  Therefore  student  should  be  able  to  implement  the
algorithms and analyze their behavior. Students should:
Implement comparison sorting algorithms and perform their empirical analysis.
Implement divide-and-conquer sorting algorithms and perform their empirical analysis.
Implement algorithms for order statistics and perform their empirical analysis.
Implement algorithms by using Greedy, DP and backtracking paradigm 
Implement NP-complete problems and realize their hardness.
Recommended Books:
1.Thomas  H.  Cormen,  Charles  E.  Leiserson,  Ronald  L.  Rivest  and  Clifford  Stein,
“Introduction to algorithms”, Third Edition.. The MIT Press, 2009.
2.Ellis  Horowitz,  Sartaj  Sahni ,  Sanguthevar  Rajasekiaran,  “Computer  Algorithms”,  Second
Edition, Silicon Press, 2007.
3.Kleinberg, Jon, and Eva Tardos , “ Algorithm Design ” , Addison-Wesley , First Edition, 2005

--- PAGE 60 ---
52System Analysis and Design
Course Title: System Analysis and Design Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC326 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course  Description:  This  course  familiarizes  students  with  the  concepts  of  information  systems
development  including  systems  development  life  cycle,  different  approaches  to  systems
development,  project  management,  planning,  analysis,  design,  implementation  and  maintenance.
This course also covers some fundamental concepts of object oriented systems analysis and design.
Course Objectives: The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts
of system analysis and design so that students will be able to develop information systems using
different methodologies, tools, techniques, and approaches.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Foundations for Systems Development (10 Hrs.)
1.1. The Systems Development Environment:  Introduction; A Modern Approach to Systems
Analysis  and  Design;  Developing  Information  Systems  and  the  Systems  Development  Life
Cycle; The Heart of the Systems Development Process and Traditional Waterfall SDLC; CASE
Tools
1.2. Other Approaches:  Prototyping; Spiral; Rapid Application Development; Introduction to
Agile Development
1.3. Managing  the  Information  Systems  Project:  Introduction;  Managing  the  Information
Systems  Project;  Representing  and  Scheduling  Project  Plans;  Using  Project  Management
Software
Unit 2:  Planning (5 Hrs.)
2.1.  Identifying and Selecting Systems Development Projects: Introduction; Identifying and
Selecting Systems Development Projects; Corporate and Information Systems Planning
2.2.  Initiating  and  Planning  Systems  Development  Projects:  Introduction;  Initiating  and
Planning  Systems  Development  Projects;  Process  of  Initiating  and  Planning  IS  Development
Projects, Assessing Project Feasibility; Building and Reviewing the Baseline Project Plan
Unit 3: Analysis (13 Hrs.)
3.1.  Determining  System  Requirements:  Introduction;  Performing  Requirements
Determination; Traditional Methods for Determining Requirements; Contemporary Methods for
Determining System Requirements; Radical Methods for Determining System Requirements
3.2.  Structuring System Process Requirements:  Introduction; Process Modeling; Data Flow
Diagrams; Modeling Logic with Decision Tables, Decision Trees, and Pseudocodes
3.3. Structuring  System  Data  Requirements:  Introduction;  Conceptual  Data  Modeling;
Gathering Information for Conceptual Data Modeling; Introduction to E-R Modeling
Unit 4: Design (7 Hrs.)
4.1. Designing  Databases:  Introduction;  Database  Design;  Relational  Database  Model;
Normalization;  Transforming  E-R  Diagrams  Into  Relations;  Merging  Relations;  Physical  File
and Database Design; Designing Fields; Designing Physical Tables
4.2.  Designing  Forms  and  Reports:  Introduction;  Designing  Forms  and  Reports;  Formatting
Forms and Reports; Assessing Usability

--- PAGE 61 ---
534.3. Designing  Interfaces  and  Dialogues:  Introduction;  Designing  Interfaces  and  Dialogues;
Interaction  Methods  and  Devices;  Designing  Interfaces;  Designing  Dialogues;  Designing
Interfaces and Dialogues in Graphical Environments
Unit 5: Implementation and Maintenance (4 Hrs.)
5.1. System  Implementation:  Introduction,  System  Implementation,  Software  Application
Testing, Installation, Documenting the System, Training and Supporting Users, Organizational
Issues in Systems Implementation
5.2. Maintaining  Information  Systems:  Introduction,  Maintaining  Information  Systems,
Conducting Systems Maintenance
Unit 6: Introduction to Object-Oriented Development (6 Hrs.)
Basic  Characteristics  of  Object-Oriented  Systems;  Object-Oriented  System  Analysis  and  Design
(OOSAD); Introduction to Unified Modeling Language, Structural and Behavioral Diagrams
Laboratory  /  Project  Work:  In  the  practical  session,  students  will  learn  to  use  project
management, CASE, and modeling tools. They also prepare a project report that includes at least
analysis, design, and implementation phases of system analysis and design. The project can be done
in groups with at most four members in each group using any suitable database, programming, and
interfacing technologies.
Text Books:
1.Joseph S. Valacich and Joey F. George, Modern Systems Analysis and Design , 8th Edition, 
Pearson
2.Alan Dennis, Barbara Haley Wixom, and David Tegarden , Systems Analysis and Design – An 
Object-Oriented Approach with UML, 5th Edition, Wiley
References Books:
1.Kenneth E. Kendall and Julie E. Kendall, System Analysis and Design, 9th Edition, Pearson
2.Jeffrey Whitten and Lonnie Bently, System Analysis and Design Methods, 7th Edition
3.Scott Tilley and Harry J. Rosenblatt, System Analysis and Design, 11th Edition

--- PAGE 62 ---
54Cryptography
Course Title: Cryptography Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC327 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V        
Course  Description:  The  course  introduces  the  underlying  the  principles  and  design  of
cryptosystems. The course covers the basics concepts of cryptography including: traditional ciphers,
block ciphers, stream ciphers, public and private key cryptosystems. The course also includes the
theory of hash functions, authentication systems, network security protocols and malicious logic.  
 
Course Objectives: The objectives of this course are to familiarize the students with cryptography
and  its  applications.  The  students  will  be  able  to  develop  basic  understanding  of  cryptographic
mechanisms.
Course Contents:
Unit I: Introduction and Classical Ciphers (7 hr) 
1.1.Security:  Computer  Security,  Information  Security,  Network  Security,  CIA  Triad,
Cryptography, Cryptosystem, Cryptanalysis, Security Threats and Attacks, Security Services,
Security Mechanisms
1.2. Classical Cryptosystems:
Substitution  Techniques:  Ceasar,  Monoalphabetic,  Playfair,  Hill,  Polyalphabetic  ciphers,
One-time pad
Transposition Techniques: Rail Fence Cipher 
1.3. Modern Ciphers: Block vs. Stream Ciphers, Symmetric vs. Asymmetric Ciphers
Unit II: Symmetric Ciphers (10 hr)
12.1. Fiestel Cipher Structure, Substitution Permutation Network (SPN)
12.2. Data Encryption Standards (DES), Double DES, Triple DES
12.3. Finite Fields: Groups Rings, Fields, Modular Arithmetic, Euclidean Algorithm, Galois Fields
(GF(p) & GF(2n)), Polynomial Arithmetic
12.4. International Data Encryption Standard (IDEA)
12.5. Advanced Encryption Standards (AES) Cipher
12.6. Modes of Block Cipher Encryptions (Electronic Code Book, Cipher Block Chaining, Cipher
Feedback Mode, Output Feedback Mode, Counter Mode)
Unit III: Asymmetric Ciphers (8 hr)
13.1. Number  Theory:  Prime  Numbers,  Fermat’s  Theorem,  Euler’s  Theorem,  Primility  Testing,
Miller-Rabin Algorithm, Extended Euclidean Theorem, Discrete Logarithms
13.2. Public Key Cryptosystems, Applications of Public Key Cryptosystems
13.3. Distribution of public key, Distribution of secret key by using public key cryptography, Diffie-
Helman  Key Exchange, Man-in-the-Middle Attack
13.4. RSA Algorithm 
13.5. Elgamal Cryptographic System

--- PAGE 63 ---
55Unit IV: Cryptographic Hash Functions and Digital Signatures (8 hr)
14.1. Message Authentication, Message Authentication Functions, Message Authentication Codes
14.2. Hash Functions, Properties of Hash functions, Applications of Hash Functions 
14.3. Message Digests: MD4 and MD5
14.4. Secure Hash Algorithms: SHA-1 and SHA-2 
14.5. Digital Signatures: Direct Digital Signatures, Arbitrated Digital Signature 
14.6. Digital Signature Standard: The DSS Approach, Digital Signature Algorithm
14.7. Digital Signature Standard: The RSA Approach
Unit V: Authentication (3 Hrs)
15.1. Authentication System, 
15.2. Password Based Authentication, Dictionary Attacks, 
15.3. Challenge Response System, 
15.4. Biometric System
15.5. Needham-Schroeder Scheme, Kerberos Protocol
Unit VI:  Network Security and Public Key Infrastructure (6 Hrs)
16.1. Overview of Network Security
16.2. Digital Certificates and X.509 certificates, Certificate Life Cycle Management
16.3. PKI trust models, PKIX
16.4. Email Security: Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
16.5. Secure Socket Layer (SSL) and Transport Layer Security (TLS)
16.6. IP Security (IPSec) 
16.7. Firewalls and their types
Unit VII:  Malicious Logic (3 Hrs)
7.1.  Malicious Logic, Types of Malicious Logic: Virus, Worm, Trojan Horse, Zombies, Denial
of Service Attacks,
7.2.  Intrusion, Intruders and their types, Intrusion Detection System
Laboratory Works:
The  laboratory  work  includes  implementing  and  simulating  the  concepts  of  cryptographic
algorithms,  hash  functions,  digital  signatures,  network  security  protocols  and  malicious  logic.
Students are free to use any of the language and platform as per the skills.
Text Book:
1.  W. Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security , Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1.William Stallings, Network Security, Principles and Practice.
2.Matt Bishop, Computer Security, Art and Science .
3.Mark Stamp, Information Security: Principles and Practices.
4.Bruce Schneier,  Applied Cryptography .
5.Douglas. R. Stinson. Cryptography: Theory and Practice.
6.B. A. Forouzan, Cryptography & Network Security , Tata Mc Graw Hill.

--- PAGE 64 ---
56Simulation and Modeling
Course Title: Simulation and Modeling Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC328 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course Description : The syllabus consists of introduction to system, modeling and simulation of
different  types  of  systems.  It  includes  the  modeling  of  systems,  its  validation,  verification  and
analysis  of  simulation  output.   It  comprises  the  concept  of  queuing  theory,  random  number
generation as well as study of some simulation languages.
Course Objective : To make students understand the concept of simulation and modeling of real 
time systems.
Course Contents :
Unit 1: Introduction to Simulation (6 Hours)
System and System Environment, Components of System, Discrete and Continuous System, System
Simulation,  Model  of  a  System,  Types  of  Model,  Use  of  Differential  and  Partial  differential
equations  in  Modeling,  Advantages,  Disadvantages  and  Limitations  of  Simulation,  Application
Areas, Phases in Simulation Study
Unit 2: Simulation of Continuous and Discrete System (7 Hours)
Continuous  System  Models,  Analog  Computer,  Analog  Methods,  Hybrid  Simulation,  Digital-
Analog Simulators, Feedback Systems
Discrete  Event  Simulation,  Representation  of  time,  Simulation  Clock  and  Time  Management,
Models of Arrival Processes - Poisson Processes, Non-stationary Poisson Processes, Batch Arrivals;
Gathering statistics, Probability and Monte Carlo Simulation
Unit 3: Queuing System (6 Hours)
Characteristics  and  Structure  of  Basic  Queuing  System,  Models  of  Queuing  System,  Queuing
notation, Single server and Multiple server Queueing Systems, Measurement of Queueing System
Performance, Elementary idea about  networks of Queuing with particular emphasis to computer
system, Applications of queuing system
Unit 4: Markov Chains (2 Hours)
Features, Process Examples, Applications
Unit 5: Random Numbers (7 Hours)
Random Numbers and its properties, Pseudo Random Numbers, Methods of generation of Random
Number, Tests for Randomness - Uniformity and independence, Random Variate Generation
Unit 6: Verification and Validation (4 Hours)
Design of Simulation Models, Verification of Simulation Models, Calibration and Validation of the 
models, Three-Step Approach for Validation of Simulation Models, Accreditation of Models
Unit 7: Analysis of Simulation Output (4 Hours)
Conﬁdence  Intervals  and  Hypothesis  Testing,  Estimation  Methods,  Simulation  run  statistics,
Replication of runs, Elimination of initial bias
Unit 8: Simulation of Computer Systems (9 Hours)
Simulation Tools,  Simulation Languages: GPSS, Case Studies of different types of Simulation 

--- PAGE 65 ---
57Models and Construction of sample mathematical models
Laboratory Work:
Practical should include the simulation of some real time systems (continuous and discrete event 
systems), Queuing Systems, Random Number generations as well as study of Simulation Tools and 
Language
Text Book:
1.Jerry Banks, John S. Carson, Barry L. Nelson, David M. Nicole, “Discrete Event system 
simulation”, 5th Edition, Pearson Education
Reference Books:
1.Geoffrey Gordon: System Simulation
2.Law, "Simulation Modeling and Analysis", 5th Edition, McGraw-Hill

--- PAGE 66 ---
58Web Technology
Course Title: Web Technology Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC329 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course  Description:  This  course  covers  the  fundamental  concepts  of  HTML,  CSS,  JavaScript,
XML, and PHP. 
Course Objectives: The main objective of this course is to provide basic knowledge of web design
using HTML and CSS, client side scripting using JavaScript, handling web data using XML and
server side scripting using PHP.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction (3 Hrs.)
Web Basics: Internet, Intranet, WWW, Static and Dynamic Web Page; Web Clients; Web Servers;
Client  Server  Architecture:  Single  Tier,  Two-Tier,  Multi-Tier;  HTTP:  HTTP  Request  and
Response; URL, Client Side Scripting, Server Side Scripting, Web 1.0, Web 2.0
 
Unit 2: Hyper Text Markup Language (10 Hrs.)
Introduction  to  HTML;  Elements  of  HTML  Document;  HTML  Elements  and  HTML  Attributes,
Headings, Paragraph, Division, Formating: b, i, small, sup, sub; Spacing: Pre, Br; Formatting Text
Phrases:  span,  strong, tt ; Image element; Anchors; Lists: Ordered and Unordered and Definition;
Tables; Frames; Forms: Form Elements, ID attributes, Class Attributes of HTML Elements; Meta
Tag,  Audio,  Video,  Canvas,  Main,  Section,  Article,  Header,  Footer,  Aside,  Nav,  Figure  Tags;
HTML Events: Window Events, Form Element Events, Keyboard Events, Mouse Events
Unit 3: Cascading Style Sheets (8 Hrs.)
Introduction; Cascadding Style Sheets (CSS); CSS Syntax; Inserting CSS: Inline, Internal, External,
ID and Class Selectors; Colors; Backgrounds; Borders; Text; Font; List; Table; CSS Box Model;
Normal  Flow  Box  Layout:  Basic  Box  Layout,  Display  Property,  Padding,  Margin;  Positioning:
Relative,  Float,  Absolute;  CSS3  Borders,  Box  Shadows,  Text  Effects  and  shadow;  Basics  of
Responsive Web Designs; Media Queries, Introduction to Bootstrap
Unit 4: Client Side Scripting with JavaScript (9 Hrs.)
Structure  of  JavaScript  Program;  Variables  and  Data  Types;  Statements:  Expression,  Keyword,
Block;  Operators;  Flow  Controls,  Looping,  Functions;  Popup  Boxes:  Alert,  Confirm,  Prompt;
Objects and properties; Constructors; Arrays; Built-in Objects: Window, String, Number, Boolean,
Date,  Math,  RegExp,  Form,  DOM;  User  Defined  Objects;  Event  Handling  and  Form  Validation,
Error  Handling,  Handling  Cookies,  jQuery  Syntax;  jQuery  Selectors,  Events  and  Effects;
Introduction to JSON
Unit 5: AJAX and XML (7 Hrs.)
Basics  of  AJAX;  Introduction  to   XML  and  its  Application;   Syntax  Rules  for  creating  XML
document;   XML  Elements;  XML  Attributes;  XML  Tree;  XML  Namespace;  XML  schema
languages: Document Type Definition(DTD), XML Schema Definition (XSD); XSD Simple Types,
XSD Attributes; XSD Complex Types; XML Style Sheets (XSLT), XQuery
Unit 6: Server Side Scripting using PHP (8 Hrs.)
PHP  Syntax,  Variables,  Data  Types  ,  Strings,  Constants,  Operators,  Control  structure,  Functions,
Array,  Creating  Class  and  Objects,  PHP  Forms,  Accessing  Form  Elements,  Form  Validation,

--- PAGE 67 ---
59Events, Cookies and Sessions,  Working with PHP and MySQL,  Connecting to Database, Creating,
Selecting,  Deleting,  Updating  Records  in  a  table,  Inserting  Multiple  Data,  Introduction  to
CodeIgniter, Laravel, Wordpress etc. 
Laboratory Works:
The  laboratory  work  includes  creating  web  pages  and  applications  with  using  HTML,  CSS,
JavaScript,  XML,  and  PHP.  Students  have  to  prepare  a  web  based  application,  using  above
mentioned technologies, as a project work.
Text Books:
1.Web Design with HTML, CSS, JavaScript and jQuery Set, Jon Duckett, John Wiley & Sons
2.Web  Technologies:  A  Computer  Science  Perspective,  Jeffrey  C.  Jackson  ,  Pearson  Prentice
Hall
3.Learning PHP, MySQL & JavaScript: with jQuery, CSS & HTML5, Robin Nixon, O’Reilly
4.PHP & MySQL: Server-side Web Development, Jon  Ducket, Wiley
Reference Books:
1.HTML5  and  CSS3  for  the  Real  World”,  Estelle  Weyl,  Louis  Lazaris,  Alexis  Goldstein,
Sitepoint
2.HTML & CSS: Design and Build Websites, Jon Duckett, John Wiley & Sons
3.Dynamic Web Programming and HTML5, Paul S. Wang, CRC Press
4.HTML5 Programming with JavaScript for Dummies, John Paul Mueller
5.JavaScript and JQuery: Interactive Front-end Web Development, Jon Duckett, Wiley
6.The Complete Reference: HTML and CSS, Thomas A. Powell, Mc Graw Hill
7.JavaScript: The Web Technologies Series,  Don Gosseli, Course Technology Cengage Learning
8.Web  Technologies:  HTML,  JAVASCRIPT,  PHP,  JAVA,  JSP,  ASP.NET,  XML  and  AJAX,
Black Book, Dreamtech Press 
9.An Introduction to XML and Web Technologies, Anders Møller  and Michael I. Schwartzbach,
Addison-Wesley 
10.PHP and MySQL Web Development, Luke Welling, Addison Wesley
11.www.w3schools.com

--- PAGE 68 ---
60Multimedia Computing
Course Title: Multimedia Computing Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC330 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester: V
Course Description: This course familiarizes students with the concepts of multimedia computing
including sound, image, video, animations, data compression, and multimedia applications.
Course Objectives: The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts
of multimedia computing and their applications.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction (5 Hrs.)
Global  Structure  of  Multimedia;  Multimedia  Application;  Medium;  Multimedia  System  and
Properties;  Characteristics  of  a  Multimedia  System;  Challenges  for  Multimedia  Systems;
Components of a Multimedia System
Unit 2: Sound /Audio System (6 Hrs.)
Concepts  of  Sound  System;  Music  and  Speech;  Speech  Generation;  Speech  Analysis;  Speech
Transmission
Unit 3: Images and Graphics (5 Hrs.)
Digital  Image  Representation;  Image  and  graphics  Format;  Image  Synthesis,  analysis  and
Transmission
Unit 4: Video and Animation (6 Hrs.)
Video  Signal  Representation;  Computer  Video  Format;  Computer-Based  animation;  Animation
Language; Methods of Controlling Animation; Display of Animation; Transmission of Animation
Unit 5: Data Compression (8 Hrs.)
Storage Space; Coding Requirements; Source, Entropy and Hybrid Coding; Lossy Sequential DCT-
based Mode; Expanded Lossy DCT-based Mode; JPEG and MPEG
Unit 7: User Interfaces (5 Hrs.)
Basic Design Issues; Video and Audio at the User Interface; User- friendliness as the Primary Goal
Unit 8: Abstractions for programming (5 Hrs.)
Abstractions Levels; Libraries; System Software Toolkits; Higher Programming Languages; Object
–Oriented Approaches
Unit 9: Multimedia Application (5 Hrs.)
Media Preparation and Composition; Media Integration and Communication; Media Entertainment;
Telemedicine;  E-learning;  Digital  Video  Editing  and  Production  Systems;  Video  Conferencing;
Video-on-demand
Laboratory  Work:  The  laboratory  work  includes  writing  programs  of  different  concepts  of
multimedia computing.

--- PAGE 69 ---
61Recommended Books:
1.Multimedia: Computing, Communications and Applications, Ralf Steinmetz and Klara 
Nahrstedt, Pearson Education Asia
2.Multimedia Communications, Applications, Networks, Protocols and   Standards, Fred Halsall, 
Pearson Education Asia
3.Multimedia Systems, John F. Koegel Buford, Pearson Education Asia

--- PAGE 70 ---
62Wireless Networking
Course Title: Wireless Networking Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC331 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course  Description:  This  course  familiarizes  students  with  different  concepts  of  wireless
networking  including  wireless  channels,  communication  techniques,  cellular  communications,
mobile network, and advanced features.
Objective :  The  main  objective  of  this  course  is  to  provide  concepts  and  principles  of  wireless
networking including protocol stacks and standards with the evolution of latest wireless networks.
Unit 1: Introduction [4Hrs]
1.1History and challenges of wireless communications
1.2WLAN technologies: Infrared, UHF narrowband, spread spectrum
1.3Wireless communications standards
Unit 2: Wireless Channel Characterization [4Hrs]
2.1Multipath propagation environment
2.2LTI channel model
2.3Channel correlation function
2.4Large scale path loss
2.5Small scale multipath fading
Unit 3: Wireless Communication Techniques [12Hrs]
3.1Transmission techniques
3.1.1 Introduction to bandpass transmission
3.1.2 Signal space and decision reasons
3.1.3 Digital modulation 
3.1.4 Power spectral density
3.2Receiver Techniques
3.2.1 Introduction to fading dispersive channels
3.2.2 Channel impairment mitigation techniques
3.2.3 Diversity
3.2.4 Channel equalization
3.3Multiple Access Technologies
3.3.1 Conflict free multiple access technologies
3.3.2 Spectral efficiencies
Unit 4: Fundamental of Cellular Communications [5Hrs]
4.1Spectrum reuse and re-farming
4.2Cell cluster concept
4.3Co-channel and adjacent channel interference
4.4Cell site call blocking and delay
4.5Channel allocation strategies
Unit 5: Mobility Management in Wireless Networks [6Hrs]
5.1Introduction
5.2Call admission control
5.3Handoff management

--- PAGE 71 ---
635.4Location management for cellular and PCS networks
5.5Traffic calculation
Unit 6: Overview of Mobile Network and Transport Layer [8Hrs]
6.1Mobile IP: IP packet delivery, Agent discovery, tunneling and encapsulation
6.2IPv6-Network layer in the internet
6.3Mobile IP session initiation protocol
6.4Wireless application protocol
6.5Mobile routing protocols: DSDV, AODV and DSR
6.6Classical TCP improvements: Mobile TCP, Time out freezing, Selective retransmission
Unit 7: Advances in Wireless Networking [6Hrs]
7.14G: Features, Challenges and Applications
7.2Overview of 4G Technologies
7.2.1 Multicarrier Modulation
7.2.2 Smart antenna techniques
7.2.3 Adaptive Modulation
7.2.4 Cognitive Radio
7.3Introduction to 5G and its vision
7.4Introduction to wireless network virtualization
7.5Concepts of Wireless Sensor Network & RFID
7.6Introduction to optical communication: Li-Fi
7.7Introduction to Software Defined Wireless Networks
7.8Concepts of Open BTS and Open Cellular Networks
Laboratory Works:
1.Implement DSSS, Channel coding, line coding in MATLAB or equiv. tool
2.Analyze performance of WiMAX/WiFi network using NetSim or equiv. tool.
3.Develop QPSK detector and understand the relation between BER and SNR. 
4.Implement various pulse shaping filers implemented in wireless communication.
5.Implement wireless routing protocol: DSDV & AODV
6.Create IPv6 based (Ad-hoc & Infrastructure) wireless network environment and evaluate 
connectivity, delay, latency, throughput etc.
7.Understand Contiki OS and implement IoT/WSN
Recommended Books:
1.Vijay Garg.  “Wireless Communications and networking”, First Edition, Elsevier 2007
2.John W. Mark and Weisua Zhuang. “Wireless communications and Networing”, Prentice 
hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 2005
3.Jochen Schiller, ”Mobile Communications”, Second Edition, Pearson Education 2012
4.Simon Haykin , Michael Moher, David Koilpillai, “Modern Wireless 
Communications”, First Edition, Pearson Education 2013

--- PAGE 72 ---
64Image Processing
Course Title: Image Processing Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC332 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course  Description:  This  course  covers  the  investigation,  creation  and  manipulation  of  digital
images  by  computer.  The  course  consists  of  theoretical  material  introducing  the  mathematics  of
images  and  imaging.  Topics  include  representation  of  two-dimensional  data,  time  and  frequency
domain  representations,  filtering  and  enhancement,  the  Fourier  transform,  convolution,
interpolation.  The  student  will  become  familiar  with  Image  Enhancement,  Image  Restoration,
Image  Compression,  Morphological  Image  Processing,  Image  Segmentation,  Representation  and
Description, and Object Recognition.
Course Objectives: The objective of this course is to make students able to: 
develop a theoretical foundation of Digital Image Processing concepts.
provide  mathematical  foundations  for  digital  manipulation  of  images;  image  acquisition;
preprocessing; segmentation; Fourier domain processing; and compression.
gain  experience  and  practical  techniques  to  write  programs  for  digital  manipulation  of
images;  image  acquisition;  preprocessing;  segmentation;  Fourier  domain  processing;  and
compression. 
Course Contents: 
Unit 1: Introduction (5 Hrs.)
Digital Image, A Simple Image Model,Fundamental steps in Image Processing, Elements of Digital
Image Processing systems, Element of visual perception, Sampling and Quantization, Some basic
relationships like Neighbors, Connectivity, DistanceMeasures between pixels
Unit 2: Image Enhancement and Filter in Spatial Domain (8 Hrs.) 
Point  operations,  contrast  stretching,  clipping  and  thresholding,  digital  negative,  intensity  level
slicing, bit plane slicing, Histogram Equalization, Spatial operations: Averaging, median, filtering
spatial low pass and high pass, high boost filter, high frequency emphasis filter, Laplacian filter,
magnification by replication and interpolation.
Unit 3: Image Enhancement in the Frequency Domain  (8 Hrs.)
Introduction to Fourier Transform and the frequency Domain, Computing and Visualizing the 2D
DFT,  Fast  Fourier  Transform,  Smoothing  Frequency  Domain  Filters,  Sharpening  Frequency
Domain Filters, Other Image Transforms (Hadamard transform, Haartransform and Discrete Cosine
transform)
Unit 4: Image Restoration and Compression (8 Hrs.)
Image  Restoration:  Models  for  Image  degradation  and  restoration  process,  Noise  Models,
Estimation of Noise Parameters, Restoration Filters, Bandrejected Filters, Bandpass Filters.
Image Compression: Image compression models, Pixel coding: run length, bit plane, Predictive and
inter-frame coding
Unit 5: Introduction to Morphological Image Processing (2 Hrs.)
Logic Operations involving binary images, Dilation and Erosion, Opening and Closing.
Unit 6: Image Segmentation (8 Hrs.)

--- PAGE 73 ---
65Image  Segmentation:  Point  Detection,  Line  Detection,  Edge  Detection,  Gradient  Operator,  Edge
Linking and Boundary Detection, Hough Transform, Thresholding, Region-oriented Segmentation.
Unit 7: Representations, Description and Recognition (6 Hrs.)
Introduction to some descriptors (Chain codes, Signatures, Shape Numbers, Fourier Descriptors),
Patterns and pattern classes, Decision-Theoretic Methods, Overview of Neural Networks in Image
Processing, Overview of pattern recognition.
Laboratory Work: Students are required to develop programs in related topics using MatLab or
suitable programming language.
Text Books: 
1.Rafael  C.  Gonzalez  and  Richard  E.  Woods,  “Digital  Image  Processing”,  Pearson  Edition,
Latest Edition.
Reference Books:
1.I. Pitas, "Digital Image Processing Algorithms", Prentice Hall, Latest Edition.
2.A. K. Jain, “Fundamental of Digital Image processing”, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 
Latest Edition. 
3.K. Castlemann, “Digital image processing”, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., Latest Edition.
4.P. Monique and M. Dekker, “Fundamentals of Pattern recognition”, Latest Edition.

--- PAGE 74 ---
66Knowledge Management
Course Title: Knowledge Management Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC333 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course Description: This course introduces fundamental concept of knowledge and different l 
issues in managing the knowledge.
Course Objective: This course enables to learn about the Evolution of Knowledge management, be
familiar with tools, be exposed to applications, and be familiar with some case studies.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: (9 Hrs.)
5. An Introduction to Knowledge Management, The foundations of knowledge management,
Cultural  issues,  Technology  applications  organizational  concepts  and  processes,
Management aspects, decision support systems. 
6. The Evolution of Knowledge management: From Information Management to Knowledge
Management,  Key  Challenges  Facing  the  Evolution  of  Knowledge  Management,  Ethics
for Knowledge Management.
Unit 2:  (9 Hrs.)
2.1 Organization  and  Knowledge  Management,  Building  the  Learning  Organization.
Knowledge  Markets: Cooperation  among  Distributed  Technical  Specialists,  Tacit
Knowledge and Quality Assurance.
Unit 3:  (10 Hrs.)
3.1. Telecommunications  and  Networks  in  Knowledge  Management,  Internet Search Engines
and Knowledge  Management,  Information  Technology  in  Support  of  Knowledge
Management
3.2. Knowledge  Management  and  Vocabulary  Control,  Information  Mapping  in  Information
Retrieval, Information Coding in the Internet Environment, Repackaging Information.
Unit 4: (8 Hrs.)
4.1. Components of a Knowledge Strategy - Case Studies (From Library to Knowledge Center,
Knowledge Management in the Health Sciences, Knowledge Management in Developing
Countries).
Unit 5: (9 Hrs.)
5.1. Advanced  topics  and  case  studies  in  knowledge  management  -  Development  of  a
knowledge  management  map/plan  that  is  integrated  with  an  organization's  strategic
and business plan - A case study on Corporate Memories for supporting various aspects in
the process life -cycles of an organization
Laboratory Works:
Upon completion of the course, the student should be able to:
Use the knowledge management tools.
Develop knowledge management Applications.
Design and develop enterprise applications.

--- PAGE 75 ---
67Text Book:
1.Srikantaiah. T. K., Koenig, M., “Knowledge Management for the Information Professional”
Information Today, Inc., 2000.
Reference Books:
1Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, H., “The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies
Create the Dynamics of Innovation”, Oxford University Press, 1995.

--- PAGE 76 ---
68Society and Ethics in Information Technology
Course Title: Society and Ethics in Information Technology Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC334 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Course Description:
This course covers different concepts related with sociology, and social and ethical issues related
with  the  use  of  Information  Technology.  This  course  also  covers  social  context  of  computing,
software issues and new frontiers of computer ethics.
Course Objective:
The basic objective of this course is to provide fundamental knowledge on the concept of sociology
to understand social, cultural, economic, political and technical aspects, and knowledge of different
social and ethical issues related with Information Technology. 
Unit 1: Introduction [4 Hrs.]
Concept and Evolution of Sociology; Applications of Sociology; Emergence of Social and Ethical
Problems; Computer Ethics and Computer Ethics Education; Ethics and Professions
Unit 2: Social and cultural change [6 Hrs.]
Process;  Theories  of  Social  Change  (Evolution,  Functional,  Conflict);  Factors  of  Social  Change
(Economics, Technology, Education, Demography); Role of Media and Communication in Social
and  Cultural  Change;  Innovation  and  Diffusion;  Resistance  of  Social  Change;  Technological
Changes and its Consequences
Unit 3: Understanding development [5 Hrs.]
Definition  and  Approaches  of  Development;  Indicators  of  Development;  Features  of  Developing
Countries; Development Planning; Role of National and International Community and State
Unit 4: Process of transformation [4 Hrs.]
Modernization, Globalization and Migration, E-governance, E-commerce
Unit 5: Ethics and Ethical Analysis [4 Hrs.]
Traditional  Definition;  Ethical  Theories;  Functional  Definition  of  Ethics;  Ethical  Reasoning  and
Decision Making; Codes of Ethics; Reflections on Computer Ethics; Technology and Values
Unit 6: Intellectual Property Rights and Computer Technology [6 Hrs.]
Definitions;  Computer  Products  and  Services;  Foundations  of  Intellectual  Property;  Ownership;
Intellectual  Property  Crimes;  Protection  of  Ownership  Rights;  Protecting  Computer  Software;
Transnational Issues and Intellectual Property
Unit 7: Social Context of Computing [4 Hrs.]
Introduction;  Digital  Divide;  Obstacles  to  Overcome  the  Digital  Divide;  ICT  in  the  Workplace;
Employee Monitoring; Workplace, Employee, Health, and Productivity
 
Unit 8: Software Issues [5 Hrs.]
Definitions; Causes of Software Failures; Risk; Consumer Protection; Improving Software Quality;
Producer Protection

--- PAGE 77 ---
69Unit 9: New Frontiers for Computer Ethics [7 Hrs.]
Artificial Intelligence ad Ethics; Virtualization, Virtual Reality, and Ethics; Cyberspace and Ethics;
Cyberbullying 
Recommended Books:
1.Alex Inkles, “ What is Sociology? Introduction in the Discipline & Profession ”, Prentice Hall of 
India
2.Joseph Migga Kizza,  Ethical and Social Issues in the Information Age, Springer International 
Publishing , 6th Edition, 2017
3.Michael J. Quinn, Ethics for the Information Age, 7th Edition, Pearson Education, 2017
4.G. M. Foster, “ Traditional Culture & Impact of Technological Change ”
5.C.N.S. Rao, “ Principle of Sociology with an Introduction of Social Thought ”, S. Chand & Co. 
Ltd.
6.Pratley Peter, “ The Essence of Business Ethics ”, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi
7.A .Giddens & D. Mitchell, “ Introduction to Sociology ”, 3rd Ed., London, W.W. Norton & 
company

--- PAGE 78 ---
70Microprocessor Based Design
Course Title: Microprocessor Based Design Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC335 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  V
Course  Description:  This  course  covers  range  of  issues  to  be  considered  in  designing  a
microprocessor-based system. First, the criteria for selecting a microprocessor/microcontroller are
discussed, and second, the hardware and software aspects of designing systems are focused. 
Course Objective: The course objective is to demonstrate the concept of microprocessor and to be
able to design a microprocessor based system to get desired results. It also emphasizes on hardware
interfacing of 8051 to develop solutions of real world problems.  
Course Contents:
Unit 1:  Introduction to Microcontroller (12 Hrs.) 
Overview  of  Typical  Microcontroller,  The  Picocontroller,  The  Microcontroller’s  Memory,  The
Central  Processor,  Timing,  The  I/O  Interface,  The  Address,  Data,  and  Control  Buses,  The
Picocontroller  Design,  Software/Firmware  Development  Architecture,  Interfacing,  Interfacing
Types, Interfacing Techniques, Introduction of PIC, and ARM 
Unit 2: Sensors and Actuators (7 Hrs.) 
Sensors, Analog to Digital Conversion, Control Algorithm, Digital to Analog Conversion, Actuator
Unit 3:  Bus and Communication Technology (8 Hrs.) 
Common Parallel and Serial Bus Systems, Topology, Arbitration, Synchronization, CAN-Protocol,
Bluetooth, PCI, ISA, WIFI
Unit 4: Introduction to 8051 Microcontroller and  Programming (12 Hrs.)
8051 architecture and pin diagram, Registers, Timers, Counters, Flags, Special Function Registers,
Addressing  Modes,  Data  types,  Instructions  and  Programming,  Single–bit  Operations,  Timer  and
Counter  Programming,  Interrupts  Programming,  Serial  Communication,  Memory  Accessing  and
their Simple Programming Applications
Unit 5:  Electromagnetic Interference and Compatibility (6 Hrs.) 
Basics of PCB Design, Design Consideration, Impact of EMI, Sources of EMI, Types of Noise, 
Grounding, Shielding, EMI, and EMC Standard
Laboratory works: 
Programming and Application development around 8051, Interfacing to ADC, DAC, and Sensors 
Recommended Books: 
1.D. V. Hall, Microprocessors and Int erfacing - Programming and Hardware , McGraw
Hill
2.K. J. Ayala, The 8051 Microcontroller: Architecture, Programming and Applications ,
West    
3.Mazidi,  M.A.,  The  8051  Microcontroller  and  Embedded  System ,  Pearson  Education
(2008) 
4.T.  Bansod,  Pratik  Tawde,  Microcontroller  Programming  (8051,  PIC,  ARM7  ARM
Cortex) , Shroff Publishers & Distributors Pvt. Ltd

--- PAGE 79 ---
71Software Engineering
Course Title: Software Engineering Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC375 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This course familiarizes students with different concepts of software engineering mainly focusing
on  software  process  models,  agile  development,  requirements  engineering,  models,  design,
implementation, testing, evolution, and software project management.
Course Objectives:
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of software
engineering  so  that  students  will  be  able  to  develop  high  quality  software  using  different
software management skills.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction (2 Hrs.)
Software  and  its  Types;  Attributes  of  Good  Software;  Software  Engineering  and  its
Importance;  Fundamental  Software  Engineering  Activities;  Difference  between  Software
Engineering  and  Computer  Science;  Difference  between  Software  Engineering  and  System
Engineering;  Challenges  and  Cost  of  Software  Engineering;  Professional  Software
Development;  Software  Engineering  Diversity;  Internet  Software  Engineering;  Software
Engineering Ethics
Unit 2: Software Processes (5 Hrs.)
Software  Process;  Software  Process  Models  (Waterfall  Model;  Incremental  Development;
Integration  and  Configuration);  Software  Process  Activities  (Software  Specification,
Software  Design  and  Implementation;  Software  Validation;  Software  Evolution);  Coping
with Change (Prototyping, Incremental Delivery); Process Improvement
Unit 3: Agile Software Development (3 Hrs.)
Agile  Development;  Plan-Driven  vs.  Agile  Development;  Agile  Methods;  Agile
Development Techniques; Introduction to Agile Project Management
Unit 4: Requirements Engineering (3 Hrs.)
Concept  of  User  and  System  Requirements;  Functional  and  Non-Functional  Requirements;
Requirements  Engineering  Process;  Requirements  Elicitation;  Requirements  Specification;
Requirements Validation; Requirements Change
Unit 5: System Modeling (6 Hrs.)
Introduction  to  System  Modeling;  Context  Models;  Interaction  Models;  Structural  Models;
Behavioral Models; Model-Driven Architecture
Unit 6: Architectural Design (6 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Architectural  Design  Decisions;  Architectural  Views;  Architectural  Patterns;
Application Architectures

--- PAGE 80 ---
72Unit 7: Design and Implementation (5 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Object-Oriented  Design  using UML; Design Patterns; Implementation Issues;
Open-Source Development
Unit 8: Software Testing (5 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Validation  and  Verification  Testing;  Software  Inspection;  Software  Testing
Process; Development Testing; Test-Driven Development; Release Testing; User Testing
Unit 9: Software Evolution (3 Hrs.)
Evolution Process; Legacy Systems; Software Maintenance
Unit 10: Software Management (7 Hrs.)
Software  Project  Management;  Project  Management  Activities  (Project  Planning,  Risk
Management,  People  Management,  Reporting  and  Proposal  Writing);  Project  Planning
(Software  Pricing,  Plan-Driven  Development,  Project  Scheduling,  Estimation  Techniques,
COCOMO  Cost  Modeling);  Introduction  to  Quality  Management  and  Configuration
Management
Laboratory / Project Work:
Students should prepare a project report along with software product using different concepts
of  software  engineering.  The  project  can  be  done  in  groups  with  at  most  four  members  in
each group using any suitable database, programming, interfacing technologies, and project
management concepts.
Text Book:
1.Software Engineering, 10th Edition, Ian Sommerville, Pearson Education 2016
References Books:
1.Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 8th Edition, Roger S. Pressman and 
Bruce R. Maxim, McGraw-Hill Education 2015
2.Beginning Software Engineering, Rod Stephens, John Wiley & Sons Inc 2015

--- PAGE 81 ---
73Compiler Design and Construction
Course Title: Compiler Design and Construction Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC376 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This  course  is  designed  to  develop  acquaintance  with  fundamental  concepts  of  compiler
design.  The  course  starts  with  the  basic  concepts  and  also  includes  different  phases  of
compilers like lexical analysis, syntax analysis, syntax-directed translation, type checking etc.
in detail.
Course Objectives:
To develop knowledge in compiler design
To develop lexical analyzers, parsers, and small compilers using different tools 
To develop lexical analyzers, parsers, and small compilers by using general purpose
programming languages.
Course Contents :
Unit 1: (3 hrs)
1.1Compiler Structure: Analysis and Synthesis Model of Compilation, different sub-phases
within analysis and synthesis phases
1.2Basic  concepts  related  to  Compiler  such  as  interpreter,  simple  One-Pass  Compiler,
preprocessor, macros, symbol table and error handler.
Unit 2: (22 hrs)
2.1Lexical Analysis: Its role, Specification and Recognition of tokens, Input Buffer, Finite
Automata  relevant  to  compiler  construction  syntactic  specification  of  languages,
Optimization of DFA based pattern matchers
2.2Syntax  Analysis:  Its  role,  Basic  parsing  techniques:  Problem  of  Left  Recursion,  Left
Factoring, Ambiguous Grammar, Top-down parsing, Bottom-up parsing, LR parsing
2.3Semantic Analysis:  Static & Dynamic Checks, Typical Semantic errors, Scoping, Type
Checking;  Syntax  directed  definitions  (SDD)  &  Translation  (SDT),  Attribute  Types:
Synthesized  &  Inherited,  Annotated  Parse  Tree,  S-attributed  and  L-attributed  grammar,
Applications  of  syntax  directed  translation,  Type  Systems,  Type  Checking  and
Conversion
Unit 3: (4hrs)
3.1Symbol  Table  Design:  Function  of  Symbol  Table,  Information  provided  by  Symbol
Table, Attributes and Data Structures for symbol table
3.2Run–time storage management
Unit 4: (16 hrs)
4.1Intermediate  Code  Generator:  High-level  and  Low-level  Intermediate  representation,
Syntax  tree  &  DAG  representations,  Three-address  code,  Quadruples,  Triples,  SDT  for
intermediate code, Intermediate code generation for Declarations, Assignments, Control
Flow, Boolean Expressions and Procedure Calls; Back patching
4.2Code Generator: Factors affecting a code generator, Target Language, Basic blocks and
flow graphs, Dynamic programming code-generation algorithm

--- PAGE 82 ---
744.3Code  Optimization:  Need  and  criteria  of  Code  Optimization,  Basic  optimization
techniques
4.4Case Studies of some compilers like C compiler, C++ complier
Laboratory Works:
The laboratory work develops practical knowledge on different concepts of compiler design.
Students should 
Create a project by using lexical analyzer generator or any high level language
Create a parser by using parser generator or any high level language
Write programs for intermediate code generation and machine code generation
Create front end of a compiler and using general purpose programming languages 
Recommended Books:
1.Compilers Principles, Techniques, and Tools, Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi, Jeffrey D. 
Ullman; Pearson Education
2.Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation, Johne E. Hopcroft, 
Rajeev Motwani, Jeffrey D. Ulman, Pearson Education
3.Advanced Compiler Design and Implementation, Steven Muchnick, Morgan Kaufman
Publication

--- PAGE 83 ---
75E-Governance
Course Title: E-Governance Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC377 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This  course  familiarizes  students with different concepts of E-Government and E-Governance,
different E-Governance models and infrastructure development, E-government security, and data
warehousing and data mining for e-governance.
Course Objectives:
To develop knowledge of e-governance and e-government
To know different e-governance models and infrastructure development
To implement security and use data warehousing and mining in e-governance
Course Detail :
Unit 1: Introduction to E-Government and E-Governance (5 Hrs.)
Difference  between  E-Government  and  E-Governance;  E-Government  as  Information
System; Benefits of E-Government; E-Government Life Cycle; Online Service Delivery and
Electronic Service Delivery; Evolution, Scope and Content of E-Governance; Present Global
Trends of Growth in E-Governance
Unit 2: Models of E-Governance (10 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Model  of  Digital  Governance:  Broadcasting  /  Wider  Dissemination  Model,
Critical  Flow  Model,  Comparative  Analysis  Model,  Mobilization  and  Lobbying  Model,
Interactive  –  Service  Model  /  Government-to-Citizen-to-Government  Model  (G2C2G);
Evolution in E-Governance and Maturity Models:  Five Maturity Levels; Characteristics of
Maturity Levels; Towards Good Governance through E-Governance Models
Unit 3: E-Government Infrastructure Development (10 Hrs.)
Network Infrastructure; Computing Infrastructure; Data centers; E-Government Architecture;
Interoperability  Framework;  Cloud  Governance;  E-readiness;  Data  System  Infrastructure;
Legal  Infrastructural  Preparedness;  Institutional  Infrastructural  Preparedness;  Human
Infrastructural Preparedness; Technological Infrastructural Preparedness
Unit 4: Security for e-Government   (5 Hrs.) 
Challenges  and  Approach  of  E-government  Security;  Security  Management  Model;  E-
Government Security Architecture; Security Standards
Unit 5: Applications of Data Warehousing and Data Mining in Government (5 Hrs.)
Introduction;  National  Data  Warehouses:  Census  Data,  Prices  of  Essential  Commodities;
Other  Areas  for  Data  Warehousing  and  Data  Mining:  Agriculture,  Rural  Development,
Health, Planning, Education, Commerce and Trade, Other Sectors  
Unit 6: Case Studies (10 Hrs.)
E-Government Initiatives in Nepal, Cyber Laws, Implementation in the Land Reform, Human
Resource Management Software, NICNET, Collectorate , Computer-aided Administration of
Registration  Department  (CARD),  Smart  Nagarpalika,  National  Reservoir  Level  and

--- PAGE 84 ---
76Capacity  Monitoring  System,  Computerization  in  Andra  Pradesh,  Ekal  Seva  Kendra,
Sachivalaya  Vahini,  Bhoomi,  IT  in  Judiciary,  E-Khazana  ,  DGFT,  PRAJA,  E-Seva,  E-
Panchyat,  General  Information  Services  of  National  Informatics,  Centre  E-Governance
initiative in USA, E-Governance in China, E-Governance in Brazil and Sri Lanka
Laboratory Work: 
The laboratory work includes implementing e-governance models and systems using suitable
platform.
Text / Reference books:
1.Richard Heeks, Implementing and managing e-Government
2.C.S. R Prabhu, e-Governance: Concepts and Case studies, prentice hall of India Pvt.
Ltd.
3.J. Satyanarayana, e-Government, , prentice hall of India Pvt. Ltd
4.Backus, Michiel, e-Governance in Developing Countries, IICD Research Brief, No. 1,
March 2001

--- PAGE 85 ---
77NET Centric Computing
Course Title: NET Centric Computing Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC378 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
The  course  covers  the  concepts  of  cross-platform  web  application  development  using  the
ASP.NET Core MVC framework using C# programming Language.
Course Objectives :
The objective of this course is to understand the theoretical foundation as well as its practical
aspects of ASP.NET Core web application framework and C# language features.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Language Preliminaries (8 Hrs.)
Introduction  to  .Net  framework,  Compilation  and  execution  of  .Net  applications,  Basic
Languages constructs, Constructor, Properties, Arrays and String, Indexers, Inheritance, use
of  “base”  keyword,  Method  hiding  and  overriding,  applying  polymorphism  in  code
extensibility, structs and enums, abstract class sealed class, interface, Delegate and Events,
Partial  class,  Collections,  Generics,  File  IO,  LINQ  (Language  Integrated  Query)
Fundamentals:  Lambda  Expressions,  Try  statements  and  Exceptions,  Attributes:  Attribute
Classes, Named and Positional Attribute Parameters, Attribute Targets, Specifying Multiple
Attributes,  Asynchronous  Programming: Principle of Asynchrony, Async/Await patterns in
C#
Unit 2: Introduction to ASP.NET (3 Hrs.)
.NET  and  ASP.NET  frameworks:  .NET,  .NET  Core,  Mono,  ASP.NET  Web  Forms,
ASP.NET  MVC,  ASP.NET  Web  API,  ASP.NET  Core,  .NET  Architecture  and  Design
Principles,  Compilation  and  Execution  of  .NET  applications:  CLI,  MSIL  and  CLR,  .NET
Core in detail, .NET CLI: build, run, test and deploy .NET Core Applications
Unit 3: HTTP and ASP.NET Core (3 Hrs.)
HTTP,  Request  and  Response  Message  Format,  Common  web  application  architectures,
MVC Pattern, ASP.NET Core Architecture Overview, Projects, and Conventions, ASP.NET
and ASP.NET MVC
Unit 4: Creating ASP.NET core MVC applications (10 Hrs.)
Setting up the Environment, Controllers and Actions: Create Controllers, Create Actions and
Action  Results  Types,  Rendering  HTML  with  Views:  Razor  Syntax,  Understanding  Tag
Helpers,  Models:  Binding  and  Validations,  URL  Routing  and  features,  Web  API
Applications: API Controllers, JSON, Dependency Injection and IOC containers
Unit 5: Working with Database (6 Hrs.)
ADO.NET  basics:  Connection,  Command,  Reader  and  Adapter  classes,  Entity  Framework
(EF) Core, Object-Relational Mapper (ORM), Adding EF Core to an application: Choosing
database  provider,  data  models  and  data  context,  Querying  and  Saving  data  to  database:
Create, read, update and delete records

--- PAGE 86 ---
78Unit 6: State Management on ASP.NET Core Application (4 Hrs.)
State Management on stateless HTTP, Server-side strategies: Session State, TempData, Using
HttpContext, Cache Client-side strategies: Cookies, Query Strings, Hidden Fields
Unit 7: Client-side Development in ASP.NET Core (4 Hrs.)
Common  client-side  web  technologies,  JQuery,  Forms  and  Validation,  Single  Page
Application (SPA) Frameworks: Angular, React
Unit 8: Securing in ASP.NET Core Application (5 Hrs.)
Authentication: ASP.NET Core Identity, Adding authentication to apps and identity service
configurations, Authorization: Roles, Claims and Policies, Securing Controllers and Action
Methods, Common Vulnerabilities: Cross-site Scripting attacks, SQL Injection attacks, Cross
-site Request Forgery (CSRF), Open Redirect Attacks
Unit 9: Hosting and Deploying ASP.NET Core Application (2 Hrs.)
App  Servers  and  Hosting  models:  IIS,  Nginx,  Apache,  ASP.NET  Core  Module,  Kestrel,
Docker and Containerization, Publish to Azure cloud
Laboratory works: 
The laboratory work includes writing programs covering most of the concepts of above units
using C# and  .NET core SDK (3.0 or above)
Text / Reference Books:
1.C# 8.0 and .NET Core 3.0 – Modern Cross-Platform Development, Fourth Edition, by
Mark J. Price, 2019
2.ASP.NET  Core in Action, by Andrew Lock, 2018
3.Learning ASP.NET  Core 2.0, Michel Bruchet, Jason De Oliveira, 2017

--- PAGE 87 ---
794.Learn  ASP.NET  Core  3  -  Second  Edition,  Kenneth  Yamikani  Fukizi,  Jason  De
Oliveira, Michel Bruchet, 2019
Technical Writing
Course Title: Technical Writing Full Marks:  60 + 40
Course No: CSC379 Pass Marks:  24 + 16
Nature of the Course: Theory Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This course is designed for students to enhance their skills for workplace writing.  It helps
them  in  the  process  of  ‘listening,  researching,  planning,  composing,  revising,  and  editing’
documents for use in business, science, hi-tech, and other practical fields. Technical Writing
for  Success  provides  students  with  practical  approach  to  producing  their  own  proposal
content,  manual  instructions,  informative  briefs,  news  releases,  and  other  pragmatic
documents. Abundant in sample documents, critical thinking questions, and insightful writing
advice on style and voice, this textbook prepares students for successful technical writing.
Course Objectives:
Enable  students  to  identify  the  importance  and  characteristics  of  technical  writing  and
produce some quality technical pieces of workplace writing.  
Course Detail :
Unit 1: What Is Technical Writing (3 Hrs.)
Introduction;  You  Are  a  Technical  Writer!;  Characteristics  of  a  Technical  Writing;  How
Technical Writing Compares to Other Writing
Unit 2: Audience and Purpose (3 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Meeting  the  Audience’s  Needs;  Planning  Your  Document’s  Purpose,  Scope,
and Medium
Unit 3: Writing Process (4 Hrs.)
Introduction; A Process for Technical Writing; Planning; Drafting and Revising; Copyediting
and Publishing; Writing Collaboratively
Unit 4: Brief Correspondence (4 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Introduction  to  Text  Messages;  E-mails;  Memos,  and  Letters;  Audience;
Prewriting; Formatting; Composing the Message
Unit 5: Document Design and Graphics (4 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Designing  the  Document;  Who  Reads  Graphics?;  Designing  Graphics;
Constructing Graphics
Unit 6: Writing for the Web (4 Hrs.)
Introduction; Getting Started on Web Pages; Organizing and Designing Web Pages; Writing
Text for the Web; Special Web Pages
Unit 7: Information Reports (5 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Getting  Started  on  Informative  Reports;  Summary  and  Abstract;  Mechanism
and Description; Periodic Reports; Progress Reports; News Releases

--- PAGE 88 ---
80Unit 8: Employment Communication (5 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Getting  Started  on  Employment  Communication;  Formatting  and  Organizing
Resumes; Types of Resumes; Composing Resumes; Composing Employment Letters
Unit 9: Presentations (5 Hrs.)
Introduction;  Getting  Started  on  Presentations;  Planning;  Organizing  and  Composing;
Preparing; Rehearsing; Presenting; Organizing a Group Presentation
Unit 10: Recommendation Reports (3 Hrs.)
Introduction;  What  Is  a  Recommendation  Report?;  Starting  a  Recommendation  Report;
Formatting and Organizing Recommendation Reports; Composing Recommendation Reports
Unit 11: Proposals (3 Hrs.)
Introduction;  What  Is  a  Proposal?;  Getting  Started  on  Proposal;  Composing  Informal
Proposals; Composing Formal Proposals
Unit 12: Ethics in the Workplace (2 Hrs.)
Introduction; What Is Ethics?; Creating a Culture of Ethics; What Do you When Faces with
an Ethical Dilemma?; Why Is It So Difficult to Behave Ethically? 
Inside Track  (Ask students to go through the ideas discussed in this section as they make
much sense to writing. Explain if necessary.) 
       
Text Book:
1.Smith-Worthington, Daelene and Sue Jefferson. Technical Writing for Success . 3rd ed.
USA: Cengage Writing, 2011. 
Reference Books:
1.Anderson, Paul V. Technical Communication: A Reader-Centered Approach . 7th ed. 
 USA: Wadsworth Publishing, 2010.
2.Markel, Mike and Stuart A. Selber. Technical Communication . 12th edition . USA: 
Bedford Books, 2017.
3.Tebeaux, Elizabeth and Sam Dragga. The Essentials of Technical Communication . 4th 
ed. London: Oxford University Press, 2010.

--- PAGE 89 ---
81Applied Logic
Course Title: Applied Logic Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC380 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This  course  covers  different  concepts  of  logic  including  arguments,  proposition  and
syllogism, symbolic logic, quantification, fallacies, and reasoning.
Course Objectives:
The objectives of this course are to
Understand Concept of Validity and Invalidity
Discuss argument and fallacy analysis techniques
Demonstrate proof of validity and invalidity
Understand Syllogistic rules and immediate inferences
Discuss inductive and casual reasoning
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Argument Analysis (6 Hrs.)
1.1.Concept of Logic, Proposition and Arguments, Recognizing Arguments, Arguments
vs Explanations, Validity and Truth, Deductive and Inductive Arguments
1.2.Paraphrasing  Arguments,  Diagramming  Arguments,  Complex  Argumentative
Passages, Problems in Reasoning
Unit 2: Categorical Propositions and Syllogisms (10 Hrs.)
12.1. Theory of Deduction, Classes of Categorical Propositions, Types Categorical
Propositions, Quality, Quantity and Distribution, Square of Oppositions, Immediate
Inferences, Venn Diagrams of Categorical Propositions.
12.2. Standard  form  of  Categorical  Syllogism,  Mood  and  Figure,  Testing  Validity
by Using Venn Diagrams, Syllogistic Rules and Fallacies
12.3. Syllogistic  Arguments,  Reducing  Number  of  Terms,  Translating  Categorical
Propositions into Standard Form, Enthymemes and Sorites
Unit 3: Symbolic Logic (12 Hrs.)
13.1. Modern  Logic  and  Symbolic  Language,  Conjunction,  Disjunction,  negation,
Material Implication, Material Equivalence
13.2. Argument Forms and Refutation by Analogy, Testing Validity of Arguments
by using Truth Tables, Statement Forms, Logical Equivalences
13.3. Valid Argument Forms, Formal Proof of Validity, Replacement Rules,  Proof
of Invalidity, Inconsistency
Unit 4:  Quantification Theory  (6 Hrs.)
14.1. Need  of  Quantification,  Singular  Propositions,  Types  of  Quantifiers,
Representing Categorical Propositions in Quantification Theory
14.2. Generalization and Instantiation, Proving Validity, Proving Invalidity

--- PAGE 90 ---
82Unit 5:   Fallacies (6 Hrs.)
15.1. Concept  and  Classification  of  Fallacies,  Fallacies  of  Relevance,  Fallacies  of
Deductive Induction, Fallacies of Presumption, Fallacies of Ambiguity
Unit 6: Analogical and Casual Reasoning (5 Hrs.)
16.1. Review  of  Induction  and  Deduction,  Arguments  by  Analogy,  Analogical
Arguments, Refutation by Logical Analogy
16.2. Cause  and  Effect,  Casual  Laws,  Induction  by  Enumeration,  Casual  Analysis
Methods, Limitations of Inductive Arguments
Laboratory Works:
The  laboratory  work  includes  realizing  representation  techniques  and  makes  proper
inferences. Student should be able to
•Represent complex argumentative Passages by using Symbolic Logic
•Generate proper reasoning and inferences to reach to the conclusion
Recommended Books:
1.Irving  M.  Copy,  Carl  Cohen,  Priyadarshi  Jetli,  Monica  Prabhakar,  Introduction  to
Logic, Pearson Publication, 14th Edition, 2013  
2.Patrick  J.  Hurley,  A  Concise  introduction  to  Logic,  Wadsworth  Publication,  12th
Edition, 2014
3.Peter Kreeft, Trent Doughherty, Socratic Logic: A Logic Text Using Socratic Method,
Platonic Question, and Aristotelian Principles, St. Augustines Press, 3rd Edition 2010.

--- PAGE 91 ---
83E-Commerce
Course Title: E-Commerce Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC381 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This  course  covers  the  fundamental  concepts  of  E-commerce  and  E-business  models,  and
components of E-commerce system.
Course Objectives:
The main objective of this course is to provide basic concepts of E-commerce, E-commerce
Business  Models,  E-Payments,  E-commerce  Security,  Digital  Marketing,  Search  Engine
Optimization, and Basics of Recommendation System.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction (4 Hrs.)
E-commerce, E-business, Features of E-commerce, Pure vs. Partial E-commerce, History of
E-commerce, E-commerce Framework (People, Public Policy, Marketing and Advertisement,
Support Services, Business Partnerships), Types of E-commerce: B2C, B2B, C2B, C2C, M-
Commerce,  U-commerce,  Social-Ecommerce,  Local  E-commerce,  Challenges  in  E-
commerce, Status of E-commerce in Nepal, Overview of Electronic Transaction Act of Nepal
 
Unit 2: E-commerce Business Model (8 Hrs.)
E-commerce Business Model, Elements of Business Model, Types of Revenue Models, B2C
Business  Models:  E-tailer,  Community  Provider,  Content  Provider,  Portal,  Transaction
Broker,  Market  Creator,  Service  Provider,  B2B  Business  Models:  Net  Market  Places  (E-
distributer,  E-procurement,  Exchanges,  Industry  Consortia),  Private  Industrial  Networks
(Single  Firm, Industry Wide), Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), EDI Layered Architecture,
EDI in E-commerce, E-commerce and Industry Value Chain, Firm Value Chain, Firm Value
Web, Case Studies of Global and Local E-commerce Systems
Unit 3: Electronic Payment System (9 Hrs.)
E-payment System, Online Credit Card Transaction, Online Stored Value Payment System,
Digital  and  Mobile  Wallet,  Smart  Cards,  Social/Mobile  Peer-to-Peer  Payment  Systems,
Digital  Cash/e-cash,  E-Checks,  Virtual  Currency,  Electronic  Billing  Presentment  and
Payment  (EBPP)  System,   Auctioning  in  E-commerce  (English,  Dutch,  Vickery,  Double),
SET  Protocol,  Features  of  SET,  Participants  in  SET,  Card  Holder  Registration,  Merchant
Registration,  Purchase  Request,  Dual  Signature,  Payment  Authorization,  Payment  Capture,
Status of E-Payment Systems in Nepal, Case Studies of Global and Local Payment Systems 
Unit 4: Building E-commerce System (5 Hrs.)
E-commerce Website/Software, Building Catalogs: Static, Dynamic, Building Shopping Cart,
Transaction  Processing,  Development  of  E-commerce  Website/Software:  Databases,
Application Programs, Integration with ERP Systems, Integration with Payment Gateways,
Using Open Source CMS for Development of E-commerce Applications

--- PAGE 92 ---
84Unit 5: Security in E-Commerce (7 Hrs.)
E-commerce  Security,  Dimensions  of  E-commerce  Security:  Confidentiality,  Integrity,
Availability,  Authenticity,  Nonrepudiation,  Privacy,  Security  Threats  in  E-commerce:
Vulnerabilities  in  E-commerce,  Malicious  Code,  Adware,  Spyware,  Social  Engineering,
Phishing, Hacking, Credit card fraud and Identity theft,    Spoofing and Pharming, Client and
Server  Security,  Data  Transaction  Security,  Security  Mechanisms:  Cryptography,  Hash
Functions, Digital Signatures, Authentication, Access Controls, Intrusion Detection System,
Secured Socket Layer(SSL)
Unit 6: Digital Marketing (7 Hrs.)
Digital Marketing, Online Advertisement, Ad Targeting, Search Engine Marketing, Keyword
Advertising, Search Engine Optimization, Display Ad Marketing, Interstitial Ad, Video Ad,
Advertising  Exchanges,  Programmatic  Advertising,  Real-Time  Bidding,  E-mail  Marketing,
Affiliate  Marketing,  Social  Marketing,  Mobile  Marketing,  Local  Marketing,  Online
Marketing  Metrics,  Pricing  Models  for  Online  Advertisements,  Case  Studies:  Facebook
Marketing  Tools,  Twitter  Marketing  Tools,  Pinterest  Marketing  Tools,  Location  Based
Marketing Tools: Google AdSense
Unit 7: Optimizing E-commerce Systems (5 Hrs.)
Search  Engine  Optimization,  Working  mechinaism  of  Search  Engines,  On  Page  SEO,  Off
Page SEO, Page Ranks, Using Google Aanalytics, Social Media Analytics, Recommendation
Systems: Collaborative, Content Based, Use of Recommendation Systems in E-commerce
Laboratory Works:
The laboratory work includes developing E-commerce applications. The students are highly
encouraged to use server side and client side scripting for developing the applications with
categories, shopping carts, payment gateways. Students can also use open source ecommerce
CMS frameworks and configure them to simulate e-commerce systems. The laboratory work
for e-comerce optimization includes SEO tools like Google Analytics, Facebook Analytics,
Twitter Analytics etc. Students can also implement basic recommendation system in the e-
commerce systems.
Text / Reference Books:
1.Kenneth  C.  Laudon  and  Carol  Guercio  Traver,  E-commerce  Business  Technology
Society, Pearson
2.Electronic Transaction ACT of Nepal
3.SET Secure Electronic Transaction Specification Book 1: Business Description
4.Efraim Turban, Jon Outland, David King, Jae Kyu Lee, Ting-Peng Liang, Deborrah
C.  Turban,  Electronic  Commerce  A  Managerial  and  Social  Networks  Perspective,
Springer
5.Gary P. Schneider, Electronic Commerce, Course Technology, Cengage Learning
6.Colin Combe, Introduction to E-business Management and strategy, Elsevier
7.Dave  Chaffey,  E-Business  &  E-Commerce  Management  Strategy,  Implementation
And Practice, Pearson
8.Cristian  Darie  and  Emilian  Balanescu,  Beginning  PHP  and  MySQL  E-Commerce
From Novice to Professional, Apress
9.Cristian  Darie  and  Karli  Watson,  Beginning  ASP.NET  E-Commerce  in  C#  From
Novice to Professional, Apress
10.Larry Ullaman, Effortless E-commerce with PHP and MySQL, New Riders

--- PAGE 93 ---
8511.Eric Enge, Stephan Spencer, Rand Fishkin, and Jessie C. Stricchiola foreword by John
Battelle, The Art of SEO: Mastering Search Engine Optimization, O’Reilly
12.Adam Clarke, SEO Learn Search Engine Optimization With Smart Internet Marketing
Strategies: Learn SEO with smart internet marketing strategies
13.Charu C. Aggrawal, Recommender Systems, Springer

--- PAGE 94 ---
86Automation and Robotics
Course Title: Automation and Robotics Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC382 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI 
Course Description: 
This course provides the detailed idea about fields of robotics and its control mechanisms.
Course Objective:   
The main objective is to provide information on various parts of robots and idea on fields of
robotics.  It  also  focuses  on  various  kinematics  and  inverse  kinematics  of  robots,  trajectory
planning of robots and to study the control of robots for some specific applications.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction (8 Hrs.)
Definition  and  Origin  of  Robotics,  Types  of  Robotics,  Major  Components,  Historical
development of Robot, Robotic  System and Robot anatomy, Degrees of freedom, Coordinate
System and its type Asimov's laws of robotics, Dynamic stabilization of robots
Unit 2: Power Sources and Sensors (8 Hrs.)
Hydraulic, pneumatic and electric drives, determination of HP of motor and gearing ratio, 
variable  speed  arrangements,  path  determination,  micro  machines  in  robotics,  machine
vision, ranging, laser, acoustic, magnetic, fiber optic and tactile sensors.
      
Unit 3: Manipulators, Actuators, and Grippers (8 Hrs.)
Manipulators, Classification, Construction of manipulators,  manipulator dynamics and force
control,  electronic  and  pneumatic  manipulator  control,  End  effectors,  Loads  and  Forces, 
Grippers, design considerations, Robot motion Control, Position Sensing
Unit 4: Kinematics and Path Planning (8 Hrs.)
Solution  of  Inverse  Kinematics  Problem,  Multiple  Solution  Jacobian  Work  Envelop,  Hill
Climbing Techniques, Robot Programming Languages
Unit 5: Process Control (8 Hrs.)
Process  Control  and  Types,  On-Off  Control  Systems,  Proportional  Control  Systems,
Proportional Plus Integral (PI) Control Systems, Three Mode Control (PID) Control Systems,
Process Control Tuning.
Unit 6: Case Studies (5 Hrs.)
Multiple  robots,  Machine  Interface,  Robots  in  Manufacturing  and  not-Manufacturing
Application, Robot Cell Design, Selection of a Robot
Laboratory Works:
The  laboratory  work  should  be  focused  on  implementation  of  sensors,  design  of  control
systems. It should also deal with developing programs related Robot design and control using
python.

--- PAGE 95 ---
87Text Books:
1.Mikell P. Weiss G.M., Nagel R.N., Odraj N.G., Industrial Robotics , McGraw Hill.
2.Ghosh, Control  in  Robotics  and  Automation:  Sensor  Based  Integration ,  Allied
Publishers.
References:
1.Jain  K.C.  and  Aggarwal  B.E., Robotics  –  Principles  and  Practice ,  Khanna
Publishers
2.Schuler,  C.A.  and  McNamee,  W.L. Modern  Industrial  Electronics ,
Macmillan/McGraw-Hill
3.Klafter R.D., Chimielewski T.A., Negin M., Robotic Engineering – An Integrated
Approach , Prentice Hall of India.
4.Deb.S.R., Robotics Technology and Flexible Automation , John Wiley, USA 1992.
5.Asfahl C.R., Robots and Manufacturing Automation , John Wiley, USA 1992
6.Mc Kerrow P.J. Introduction to Robotics , Addison Wesley, USA, 1991.
7.Issac Asimov I. Robot , Ballantine Books, New York, 1986.

--- PAGE 96 ---
88Neural Networks
Course Title: Neural Networks Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC383 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI 
Course Description:
The course introduces the underlying principles and design of Neural Network. The course
covers the basics concepts of Neural Network including: its architecture, learning processes,
single layer and multilayer perceptron followed by Recurrent Neural Network
Course Objective:
The  course  objective  is  to  demonstrate  the  concept  of  supervised  learning,  unsupervised
learning in conjunction with different architectures of Neural Network 
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction to Neural Network (4 Hrs.)
Basics of neural networks and human brain, Models of a neuron, Neural Network viewed as
Directed  Graphs,  Feedback,  Network  Architectures,  Knowledge  Representation,  Learning
Processes, Learning Tasks
Unit 2: Rosenblatt’s Perceptron (3 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Perceptron,  The  Perceptron  Convergence  Theorem,  Relation  between  the
Perceptron  and  Bayes  Classifier  for  a  Gaussian  Environment,  The  Batch  Perceptron
Algorithm
Unit 3: Model Building through Regression (5 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Linear  Regression  Model:  Preliminary  Considerations,  Maximum a Posteriori
Estimation  of  the  Parameter  Vector,  Relationship  Between  Regularized  Least-Squares
Estimation and Map Estimation, Computer Experiment: Pattern Classification, The Minimum
-Description-Length  Principle,  Finite  Sample-Size  Considerations,  The  instrumental-
Variables Method
Unit 4:  The Least-Mean-Square Algorithm (5 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Filtering  Structure  of  the  LMS  Algorithm,  Unconstrained  Optimization:  A
Review,  The  Wiener  Filter,  The  Least-Mean-Square  Algorithm,  Markov  Model  Portraying
the  Deviation  of  the  LMS  Algorithm  from  the  Wiener  Filter,  The  Langevin  Equation:
Characterization of Brownian Motion, Kushner’s Direct-Averaging Method, Statistical LMS
Learning  Theory  for  Small  Learning-Rate  Parameter,  Virtues  and  Limitations  of  the  LMS
Algorithm, Learning-Rate Annealing Schedules
Unit 5: Multilayer Perceptron (8 Hrs.)
Introduction, Batch Learning and On-Line Learning, The Back-Propagation Algorithm, XOR
problem,  Heuristics  for  Making  the  back-propagation  Algorithm  Perform  Better,  Back
Propagation  and  Differentiation,  The  Hessian  and  Its  Role  in  On-Line  Learning,  Optimal
Annealing  and  Adaptive  Control  of  the  Learning  Rate,  Generalization,  Approximations  of
Functions, Cross Validation, Complexity Regularization and Network Pruning, Virtues and
Limitations  of  Back-Propagation  Learning,  Supervised  Learning  Viewed  as  Optimization
Problem,  Convolutional  Networks,  Nonlinear  Filtering,  Small-Scale  Versus  Large-Scale

--- PAGE 97 ---
89Learning Problems
Unit 6: Kernel Methods and Radial-Basis Function Networks (7 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Cover’s  Theorem  on  the  separability  of  Patterns,  The  Interpolation  problem,
Radial-Basis-Function  Networks,  K-Means  Clustering,  Recursive  Least-Squares  Estimation
of the Weight Vector, Hybrid Learning Procedure for RBF Networks, Kernel Regression and
Its Relation to RBF Networks
Unit 7:  Self-Organizing Maps (6 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Two  Basic  Feature-Mapping  Models,  Self-Organizing  Map,  Properties  of  the
Feature  Map,  Contextual  Maps,  Hierarchical  Vector  Quantization,  Kernel  Self-Organizing
Map, Relationship between Kernel SOM and Kullback-Leibler Divergence
Unit 8: Dynamic Driven Recurrent Networks (7 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Recurrent  Network  Architectures,  Universal  Approximation  Theorem,
Controllability  and  Observability,  Computational  Power  of  Recurrent  Networks,  Learning
Algorithms,  Back  Propagation  through  Time,  Real-Time  Recurrent  Learning,  Vanishing
Gradients in Recurrent Networks, Supervised Training Framework for Recurrent Networks
Using  Non  Sate  Estimators,  Adaptivity  Considerations,  Case  Study:  Model  Reference
Applied to Neurocontrol
Laboratory works: 
Practical should be focused on Single Layer Perceptron, Multilayer Perceptron, Supervised
Learning, Unsupervised Learning, Recurrent Neural Network, Linear Prediction and Pattern
Classification
Text Book:
1.Simon Haykin, Neural Networks and Learning Machines, 3rd Edition, Pearson
Reference Books:
1.Christopher M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, Oxford University
Press, 2003
2.Martin T. Hagan, Neural Network Design, 2nd Edition PWS pub co.

--- PAGE 98 ---
90Computer Hardware Design
Course Title: Computer Hardware Design Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC384 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description: 
This course provides the detailed idea about the design of computer hardware.
Course Objective:   
The main objective is to provide information on various computer hardware and their design.
It focuses on various concepts regarding processor, memory and arithmetic operations. It also
emphasizes  on  multicores,  multiprocessors  and  clusters.  It  also  deals  with  non-functional
requirements that play vital role in the design.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Computer Abstractions and Technology (3 Hrs.)
Introduction, Performance, The Power Wall, The Sea Change: The Switch from 
Uniprocessors to Multiprocessors, Manufacturing and Benchmarking the AMD Opteron X4 
Unit 2: Instructions: Language of the Computer (8 Hrs.)
Introduction, Operations of the Computer Hardware, Operands of the Computer Hardware,
Signed  and  Unsigned  Numbers,  Representing  Instructions  in  the  Computer,  Logical
Operations,Instructions  for  Making  Decisions,  Supporting  Procedures  in  Computer
Hardware,  MIPS  Addressing  for  32-Bit  Immediates  and  Addresses,  Parallelism  and
Instructions, Translating and Starting a Program, Arrays versus Pointers, Advanced Material:
Compiling C and Interpreting Java, ARM Instructions, x86 Instructions.
Unit 3: Arithmetic for Computers (5 Hrs.)
Introduction, Addition and Subtraction, Multiplication, Division, Floating Point, Parallelism
and Computer Arithmetic: Associativity, Real Stuff: Floating Point in the x86.
Unit 4: The Processor (8 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Logic  Design  Conventions,  Building  a  Data  path,  A  Simple  Implementation
Scheme,  An  Overview  of  Pipelining,  Pipelined  Data  path  and  Control,  Data  Hazards:
Forwarding  versus  Stalling,  Control  Hazards,  Exceptions,  Parallelism  and  Advanced
Instruction-Level Parallelism, Real Stuff: the AMD Opteron X4 Pipeline, Advanced Topic:
an Introduction to Digital DesignUsing a Hardware Design Language to Describe andModel
a Pipeline and More Pipelining Illustrations.
Unit 5: Large and Fast: Exploiting Memory Hierarchy (8 Hrs.)
Introduction, The Basics of Caches, Measuring and Improving Cache Performance, Virtual
Memory, A Common Framework for Memory Hierarchies, Virtual Machines, Using a Finite-
State  Machine  to  Control  a  Simple  Cache,  Parallelism  and  Memory  Hierarchies:  Cache
Coherence,  Advanced  Material:  Implementing  Cache  Controllers,  Real  Stuff:  the  AMD
Opteron X4 and Intel Nehalem Memory Hierarchies.

--- PAGE 99 ---
91Unit 6: Storage and Other I/O Topics (5 Hrs.)
Introduction,  Dependability,  Reliability,  and  Availability,  Disk  Storage,  Flash  Storage,
Connecting Processors, Memory, and I/O Devices, Interfacing I/O Devices to the Processor,
Memory, and Operating System, I/O Performance Measures: Examples from Disk and File
Systems,  Designing  an  I/O  System,  Parallelism  and  I/O:  Redundant  Arrays  of  Inexpensive
Disks, Real Stuff: Sun Fire x4 Server, Advanced Topics: Networks.
Unit 7: Multicores, Multiprocessors, and Clusters (8 Hrs.)
Introduction,  The  Difficulty  of  Creating  Parallel  Processing  Programs,  Shared  Memory
Multiprocessors,  Clusters  and  Other  Message-Passing  Multiprocessors,  Hardware
Multithreading,  SISD,  MIMD,  SIMD,  SPMD,  and  Vector,  Introduction  to  Graphics
Processing  Units,  Introduction  to  Multiprocessor  Network  Topologies,  Multiprocessor
Benchmarks,  Roofline:  A  Simple  Performance  Model,  Real  Stuff:  Benchmarking  Four
Multicores Using theRoofline Model.
Laboratory Works:
The practical work should focus on use of hardware design language and programming. It
should  also  focus  on  x86  instructions.  There  should  also  be  practical  related  to  processor,
memory, clusters, multithreading, Interfaces, pipelining.
Text Book:
1.David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy., Computer Organization and Design: The
Hardware/Software Interface, 4th Edition.
References:
1.M. M. Mano., Computer Organization, 3rd Edition
2.M. M. Mano., Computer System Architecture, 3rd Edition

--- PAGE 100 ---
92Cognitive Science
Course Title: Cognitive Science Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20
Course No: CSC385 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab Credit Hrs: 3
Semester:  VI
Course Description:
This course covers the fundamental concepts of cognitive science and brain computation.
Course Objectives:
The main objective of this course is to provide basic knowledge of web cognition process,
mind  theory,  physical  symbol  systems,  cognitive  systems,  concepts  of  brain  mappings  and
neural network structures.
Course Contents:
Unit 1: Introduction (7 Hrs.) 
Cognition  Process,  Cognitive  Psychology,  Cognitive  Science;  Foundations  of  Cognitive
Science, Cognitive Science and Multi-disciplinary; Machines and Minds; Laws thoughts to
binary  logic;  Classical  Cognitive  Science;  Connectionist  Cognitive  Science;  Mind  body
Problem; Turing Response to Mind Body Problem; Pinker, Penerose and Searle’s Responses
to  Mind  Body  Problem;  Representational  Theory  of  Mind;  Theories  of  Mental
Representation: Minimal Analysis of mental representation, Resemblance theories of mental
representation, Casual covariation theories of mental representation, internal roles theories of
mental representation
Unit 2:  Precursors of Cognitive Science (5 Hrs.)
Behaviorism;  Theory  of  Computation  and  Algorithms;  Algorithms  and  Turing  Machines;
Marr’s  Three  Level  of  Computation;  Linguistics  and  Formal  Language;  Information
Processing Models in Psychology
Unit 3: Psycological Perspective of Cognition (5 Hrs)
Cognitive Models of Memory, Atkinson-Shiffrin’s Model, Tulving’s Model, Mental Imagery,
Kosslyn’s View, Moyer’s View, Peterson’s View, Cognitive Maps, Problem Understanding, 
States of Cognition, Cognition in AI
Unit 4: Physical Symbol System and Language of Thought (7 Hrs.)
Physical  Symbol  System  Hypothesis;  Symbol  and  Symbol  Systems;  Problem  Solving   by
Symbol Structure; Physical Symbol System to Language of Thoughts; The Computer Model
of the Mind; Syntax and the Language of Thought: Fodor’s Argument for the Language of
Thought  Hypothesis;  The  Chinese  Room  Argument;  Chinese  Room  and  Turing  Test;  The
Symbol Ground Problem
Unit 5: Cognitive System (4 Hrs.)
Cognitive  System;  Architecture  for  intelligent  agents;  Modularity  of  Mind;  Modularity
Hypothesis; The ACT-R/PM architecture

--- PAGE 101 ---
93Unit 6: Brain Mapping (6 Hrs.)
Structure  and  Function  in  Brain;  Anatomical  Connectivity;  Cognitive  Functioning
Techniques  from  Neuroscience;  Mapping  the  brain’s  electrical  activity:  EEG  and  MEG;
Mapping  the  brain’s  blood  flow  and  blood  oxygen  levels:  PET  and  fMRI;  Attention;
Visuospatial attention
Unit 7:   Mind Reading (5 Hrs.)
Metarepresentation; Metarepresentation, autism, and theory of mind; Mind Reading System;
Understanding False Belief; Mind Reading as Simulation
Unit 8:  Neural Networks and Distributed Information Processing (6 Hrs.)
Neurally  Inspired  Models  of  Information  Processing;  Single-Layer  Networks  and  Boolean
Functions;  Multilayer  Networks;  Information  Processing  in  Neural  Networks;  Language
Learning in Neural Networks; Neural Network Models of Children’s Physical Reasoning
Laboratory Works:
The laboratory work includes implementing and simulating the concepts of cognition process,
intelligent agents, neural networks. In addition, laboratory work can be extended to use the
tools like PSY Toolkit, PsyNeuLink  etc.
Text Book / Reference Books:
1.José  Luis Bermúdez, Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Science of the Mind,
Cambridge University Press 
2.Michael  R.  W.  Dawson  ,  Mind,  Body,  World:  Foundations  of  Cognitive  Science,
UBC Press
3.Daniel Kolak, William Hirstein, Peter Mandik, Jonathan Waskan, Cognitive Science,
An Introduction to Mind and Brain, Routledge Taylor and Francis Group
4.Amit Konar – Artificial Intelligence and Soft computing: Behavioral and Cognitive
Modeling of the Human Brain, CRC Press

--- PAGE 102 ---
94 
 Advanced Java Programming  
 
Course Title: Advanced Java Programming     Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20 
Course No:  CSC409                 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab             Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII 
 
Course Description:  
This cours e familiarizes students with basic as well as advanced features of Java Programming 
Emphasis will be given to GUI and event -driven programming, Database Connectivity, Socket 
Programming, Servlets and JSP Technology, and Distributed Programming.  
 
Course Obj ectives : 
The main objective of this course is to  
 Introduce b asic concepts of Java Programming . 
 Exemplify  the concept of GUI programming and JDBC   
 Dem onstrate socket programming. remote objects, and servlet and JSP Technology  
 
Course Content s: 
Unit 1: Programming in Java  (8 Hrs.) 
1.1. Java Architecture, Java Buzzwords, Path and ClassPath  variables, Sample Java Program, 
Compiling and Running Java Programs . 
1.2. Arrays,  for each loop,  Class and Object,  Overloading,  Access Privileges, Interface , Inner 
Class,  Final and Static Modifiers, Packages , Inheritance , Overriding.  
1.3. Handling Exceptions: Try, Catch, Finally, Throws , and Throw keywords, Creating 
Exception Class  
1.4. Concurrency:  Introduction, Thread States , Writing Multithreaded Programs, Thread 
Properties, Thread  Synchron ization , Thread Priorities  
1.5. Working with Files: Byte Stream Classes, Character Stream Classes, Random  Access  
File, Reading and Writing Objects . 
 
Unit 2: User Interface Components with Swing  (10 Hrs.)  
2.1. Introduction: Concept of AWT, AWT vs Swing, Java Applets,  Applet Life Cycle, Swing 
Class Hierarchy, Component and Containers  
2.2. Layout Management: No Layout, Flow layout, Border Layout, Grid Layout, Gridbag 
Layout, Group La yout.  
2.3. GUI Controls: Text Fields, Password Fields, Text Areas, Scroll Pane, Label s, Check 
Boxe s, Radio Buttons, Borders, Combo Boxes, Sliders  
2.4. Menu,  Menu Item, Icons in Menu Items, Check B ox and Radio Buttons in Menu Items, 
Pop-up Menus, Keyboard Mnemonics and Ac celerators, Enabling and Disabling Menu 
Items, Toolbars, Tooltips  
2.5. Option  Dialogs, Creati ng Dialogs, File Choosers, Color Choosers , Internal Frames, 
Frames, Tables, Trees, and Tables.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 103 ---
95 
 Unit 3: Even t Handling  (4 Hrs.)  
3.1. Event Handling Concept, Listener Interfaces,  Using Action    Commands , Adapter 
Classes  
3.2. Handling Action Events, Key Events, Foc us Events, Mouse Event, Window Event, Item 
Events  
 
Unit 4: Database Connectivity  (4 Hrs.)  
4.1. JDBC Architecture, JDBC Driver Types, JDBC Configuration , Managing Connections, 
Statemen ts, Result Set, SQL Exceptions  
4.2. DDL and DML Operations using Java, Prepared Sta tements, Multiple Results , Scrollable 
Result Sets, Updateable Result Sets, Row Sets and Cached Row Sets , Transactions , SQL 
Escapes.  
 
Unit 5: Network Programming  (5 Hrs.)  
5.1. Transmission control Protocol  (TCP), User Datagram Protocol ( UDP ), Ports, IP Address 
Network Classes in JDK  
5.2. Socket programming using TCP, Socket programming using UDP, Working with 
URL’s , Working with URL Connection Class . 
5.3. Java Mail API , Sending and Receiving Email   
 
Unit 6: GUI with Java FX  (3 Hrs.)  
6.1. Introduction, JavaFX vs Swing, JavaFX La youts: FlowPane, BorderPane, Hbox, VBox, 
GridPane  
6.2. JavaFX UI Controls: Label, TextField, Button, RadioButton, CheckBox, Hyperlink , 
Menu, Tooltip, FileChooser.  
 
Unit 7: Servlets and Java Server pages (8 Hrs.)  
7.1. Web Container, Introduction to Servlets,  Life cyc le of servlets, The servlet API s, 
Writing Servlet Programs, Reading Form Parameters, Process ing Forms, Handling 
HTTP Request and Response (GET / POST   Request), Database Access with Servlets, 
Handling Cookies and Session.  
7.2. Servlet vs JSP , JSP Access Model , JSP Syntax  (Directions, Declarations, Expression, 
Scriplets, Comments), JSP Implicit Object s, Object Scope, Processing Forms, Database 
Access with JSP . 
7.3. Introduction to Java Web Frameworks  
 
Unit 8: RMI and CORBA  (3 Hrs.)  
8.1 Introduction of RMI, Architectur e of RMI, Creating and Executing RMI Applications  
8.2 Introduction to CORBA, RMI vs CORBA, Architecture of CORBA, IDL, S imple 
CORBA Program.  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work includes writing programs related to basic java programming concepts, 
Desig ning GUI, Event Handling, JDBC, Network Programming, Web Programming, and 
Distributed Programming. They also learn to develop web applications using Java Web 
Frameworks.  

--- PAGE 104 ---
96 
 Text Books : 
1. Cay S. Horstmann, Core Ja va Volume I --Fundamentals, Pearson, Eleventh  Edition, 2018  
2. Cay S. Horstmann, Core Java Volume II -Advance Features, Pearson, Eleventh Edition , 
2019  
3. Herbert Schildt , Java: The Complete Reference, McGraw -Hill Education , Eleventh 
Edition , 2018  
 
Reference Book:  
1. D.T. Editorial Services , Java 8 Programming Blac k Book , Dreamtech Press , 2015  

--- PAGE 105 ---
97 
 Data Warehousing and Data Mining  
 
Course Title: Data Warehousing and Data Mining    Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC410                 Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab             Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII 
 
Course Description : 
This course introduces advanced aspects of data warehousing and data mining, encompassing the 
principles, research results and commercial application of the current technologies . 
 
Course Objective : 
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different data mining techniques 
and data warehousing . 
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1 : Introduction to Data Warehousing (5 Hrs.) 
Lifecycle of d ata, Types of d ata, Data warehouse and d ata warehousing , Differences between 
operational database and data warehouse, A multidimensional data model, OLAP operation in 
multidimensional data model, Conceptual modeling of data warehouse, Architecture of data 
warehouse, Data warehouse implementation, Data marts , Components of data warehouse , Need 
for data warehousing ,T rends in data warehousing  
 
Unit 2: Introduction to Data Mining (2 Hrs .) 
Motivation for data m ining, Introduction to data mining system, Data mining functionalities, 
KDD, Data object and attribute types, Statistical description of data, Issues and Applications  
 
Unit 3: Data Preprocessing  (3 Hrs.) 
Data c leaning, Data integration and transformation, Data r eduction, Data discretization and 
Concept Hierarchy Generation, Data  mining p rimitives  
 
Unit 4: Data Cube Technology  (4 Hrs.)  
Efficient method for data cube computation, Cube materialization ( Introduction to Full cube, 
Iceberg cube, Closed cube, S hell cube) , General strategies for cube computation, Attribute 
oriented induction for data characterization, Mining  class comparison, D iscriminating between 
different classes  
 
Unit 5:  Mining Frequent Patterns  (6 Hrs.)  
Frequent patterns, Market basket analysis, Frequent itemsets, closed itemsets, association  rules,  
Types of association rule (Single dimensional, multidimensional, multilevel, qu antitative),  
Finding frequent itemset (Apriori algorithm, FP growth), Generating association rules from 
frequent itemset, Limitation and improving Apriori, From Associa tion Mining to Correlation 
Analysis, Lift  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 106 ---
98 
 Unit 6: Classification and Prediction  (10 Hrs.)  
Definition (Classification, Prediction), Learning and testing  of classification, Classification by 
decision tree induction, ID3 as attribute selection algorithm, Bayesian classification , Laplace 
smoothing, Classification by backpropagation, Rule based classifier (Decision tree to rules, rule 
coverage and accuracy, efficient  of rule simplification), Support vector machine, Evaluating 
accuracy (precision, recall, f -measure), Issues in classification,  Overfitting and underfitting, K -
fold cross validation , Comparing two classifier (McNemar’s test)  
 
Unit 7: Cluster Analysis  (8 Hrs.)  
Types of data in cluster analysis, Similarity and dissimilarity between objects, Clustering 
techniques: - Partitioning ( k-means, k -means++, Mini -Batch k -means, k-medoids), Hierarchical 
(Agglomerative and Divisive), Density based (DBSCAN) , Outlier analysis  
 
Unit 8: Graph Mining  and Social Network Analysis  (5 Hrs.) 
Graph mining, Why graph mining, Graph mining algorithm (Beam search, Inductive logic 
programming), Social network analysis, Link mining,  Friends of friends, Degree assortativity, 
Signed network (Theory of structured balance,  Theory of status, Conflict between the theory  of 
balance and status), Trust in a network (Atomic propagation, Propagation of distrust, Iterative 
propagation), Predicting positive and negative links  
 
Unit 9: Mining Spatial, Multimedia, Text and Web Data ( 2 Hrs.) 
Spatial data mining, Spatial data cube, Mining spatial association, Multimedia data mining, 
Similarity search in multimedia data, Mining association in multimedia data, An introduction to 
text mining, natural language processing and information extraction, Web mining (Web cont ent 
mining, Web structure mining, Web usage mining)  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory should contain all the features mentioned in a course, which should include  data 
preprocessing and cleaning, implementing classification, clustering, association algorithms in 
any programming language, and data visualization through data mining tools.  
 
Text Book :     
1. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, 3rd ed. Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, and Jian 
Pei. Morgan Kaufmann Series in Data Management Systems Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers , July 2011 . 
           
Reference  Books :  
1. Introduction to Data Mining, 2nd ed. Pang -Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, Anuj Karpatne, 
Vipin Kumar. Pearson Publ isher, 2019 . 
2. Mining of Massive Datasets by Jure Leskovec, Anand Rajaraman, Je ﬀrey D.  Ullman, 
2014 . 

--- PAGE 107 ---
99 
 Principles of Management  
 
Course Title: Principles of Management     Full Marks: 80 + 20  
Course No: MGT 411                Pass Marks:  32 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory              Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII 
 
Course Description:  
This course contains The Nature of Organizations, Introduction to Management, Evolution of 
Management Thought, Environmental Context of Management, Planning and Decision Making, 
Organizing Function, Leadership, Motivation, Communication, Control and Qualit y 
Management, Global Context of Management, Management Trends and Scenario in Nepal.  
 
Course Objective : 
The basic objective of this course is to give a comprehensive knowledge to students about 
organization and help them understand the major functions, principles, and techniques of 
management. The course deals with basic functions like planning, organizing, leading, and 
controlling with special orientation to modern management practices which are essential to 
manage business successfully and other organi zations.  
 
Course Contents:   
Unit 1: The Nature of Organizations  (3 Hrs.)  
 Concept of organization. Organizational goals – concept, purposes, and types. Features of 
effective organizational goals. Goal formulation – processes and approaches. Goal succession  
and displacement. Problems of goal formulation. Changing perspectives o f organization.  
 
Unit 2: Introduction to Management  (3 Hrs.)  
 Definition, characteristics, and principles of management. Process and functions of 
management. Managerial hierarchy. Type s of managers. Managerial skills and roles. 
Emerging challenges for management.  
 
Unit 3 : Evolution of Management Thought  (5 Hrs.)  
 Introduction, contribution and limitation of Classical theory, Human relations and 
Behavioural science theories, System theory, Decision theory, Management science theory, 
and Contingency theory. Emerging management concepts : workforce diversity, outsourcing, 
knowledge management, learning organization.  
 
Unit 4 : Environmental Context of Management  (5 Hrs.)  
 Concept o f business environment. Types of business environment – internal and external.  
Basic components of economic, socio – cultural, political, and technological environments. 
Social responsibility of business – concept and approaches. Areas of social responsibility. 
Business  ethics – meaning and significance. Emerging business environment in Nepal.  
  
Unit  5: Planning and Decision Making  (5 Hrs.)  
 Concept, types, hierarchy of planning. Process and importance of planning. Strategic 
planning. Environmenta l scanning – concept and methods. SWOT analysis. Formulation and 

--- PAGE 108 ---
100 
 implementation of strategic plans. Quantitative tools for planning. Decision making – 
definition and approaches. Types of decisions. Decision making under conditions of certainty 
and uncertai nty. Problem solving – concepts, types of problem. Problem solving strategies.  
 
Unit 6: Organizing Function  (6 Hrs.)  
 Concept and principles of organizing. Approaches to organizing – classical, behavioural , and 
contingency. Process of structuring an organization. Departmentalization – meaning and 
types. Delegation of authority – meaning, features, advantages, and barriers. Centralization 
and decentralization – meaning, advantages and disadvantages. Concept of organic and 
mechan istic views of organization. Types of modern organizational structures – matrix, team, 
and network.  
 
Unit 7: Leadership  & Conflict (3 Hrs.)  
 Concept and functions of leadership. Leadership styles. Approaches to leadership – trait, 
behavioral, and situational. Group formation. Types and characteristics of groups. Conflict – 
meaning and types. Managing conflicts in organization.  
 
Unit 8: Motivation  (3 Hrs.)  
 Concept. Theories of motivation – Need Hierarchy, and Motivation -Hygiene. Reward system 
to motivate performance. Motivation through employee participation – quality of work life, 
and self - managed teams.  
 
Unit  9: Communication  (3 Hrs.)  
 Concept, structure, and process. Types of communication – formal and informal. 
Interpersonal and nonverbal communication. Barriers to effective communication. Enhancing 
effective communication.  
 
Unit 10: Control and Quality Management  (3 Hrs.)  
 Concept, process, and types of control systems. Characteristics of effective control system. 
Quality con trol systems – concept of quality. Total Quality Management (TQM) – concept 
and tools. Deming management – principles and techniques.  
 
Unit 11: Global Context of Management  (3 Hrs.)  
 Concept of globalization. Methods of globalization. Effects of globalizat ion. Multinational 
companies – meaning, types, advantages, and disadvantages.  
 
Unit 12: Management Trends and Scenario in Nepal  (3 Hrs.)  
 Growth of business sector in Nepal. Major industries in Nepal – manufacturing, export – 
oriented, import -substitution, and service sector. Existing management practices and business 
culture. Major problems of businesses in Nepal.  
 
Recommended Books : 
1. Griffi n, Ricky W., Management , AITBS Publishers and Distributors, Delhi.  
2. Hitt, Michael A., J. Black, Stweart, and Porter, Lyman W., Management, Pearson, India.  
3. Robbins, Stephen P., and Coulter, Mary, Management , Prentice -Hall of India, New 
Delhi.  

--- PAGE 109 ---
101 
 Project Work  
 
Course Title: Project  Work       Full Marks: 80 + 20  
Course No: CSC412        Pass Marks: 32+ 8  
Nature of the Course: Project      Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII    
 
Course Description:   This course covers theoretical and practical concepts  needed to develop a 
real world software system. The course focuses on enabling students with the skills related to 
software development . The course includes practicing the abilities pertaining to the  planning, 
analysis, design,  implementation  and testing of software  applications.   
 
Course Objectives:   The objective of this course is to develop theoretical and practical  skills 
needed to develop real world software application s using different software development tools  
and techniques.  
 
Course Details:  
 
Nature of Project :  
 
The project work should include development of an application/system software. Students are 
highly recommended to implement relevant algorithms, theories and concepts that they have 
learned. The project should be practiced by following analysis, design , implementation and 
testing phases. The project can be done in group with at most three members  in each group. For 
the implementation of the project, students can choose appropriate language technologies as per 
comfort and skills. While implementing the p roject, students should be able to write their own 
program modules rather than relying on predefined APIs or Plugins except in some unavoidable 
circumstances.  
 
Phases of Project:   
 
The following are the phases of project work:  
 
1. Proposal Submission  and Presentation : Students must submit and present project 
proposal on 3rd to 4th week  of start of the seventh semester.  
 
2. Mid-Term:  Students must submit progress repor t and defend midterm progress  of their 
project work on the 10th to 11th week of the seventh  semester . 
 
3. Final Submission:  Students must submit and defend  the project  work during last week of 
the seventh  semester but before final board examination. The final defense will include a 
viva voice  followed by a demonstration of the project. The final defense will b e 
conducted by an evaluation committee  with an external from the university . Students 
must have to submit the project  final report to their respective department of 
college/campus before at least 10 days of final defense date. The report should be 

--- PAGE 110 ---
102 
 submitte d in standard format as prescribed. The hard/soft copy of report should be made 
available to the external before a week of presentation date.  
 
Provision of Supervision:   
 
The supervisor should be a regular faculty of the campus/college. The role of superv isor i s to 
provide appropriate guidance to the students through out the proje ct. A supervisor can supervise 
at most three groups  of the project in a section. The supervisor should rigorously supervise, 
monitor, feedback and evaluate the project groups under  his/her supervision.  
 
Evaluation Scheme:  
 
1. Proposal  Defense   - 10% Marks of 100 (2 Marks Head/Program Coordinator + 6 Marks 
Supervisor + 2 Marks Internal Examiner)  
2. Midterm  - 20% Marks of 100 (3 Marks Head/Program Coordinator + 14 Marks 
Supervisor + 3 Marks  Internal Examiner )  
3. Final Defense - 70% Marks of 1 00 (5 Marks Head/Program Coordinator + 40 Marks 
Supervisor + 5 Marks Internal Examiner + 20 Marks External Examiner)  
 
The evaluation committee and evaluation criteria should be as follow;  
 
a. Evaluation c ommittee  
- HOD/Coordinator  of the campus/college  
- Project Supervisor (Regular faculty of the campus/college)   
- Internal Examiner  (Regular faculty of the campus/college)  
- External Examin er (Allocated from  university at the final defense)  
 
b. Marks Allocation : 
- Head / Program Coordinator – 10 
- Project Supervisor – 60 
- Internal Examiner – 10 
- External  Examiner – 20 
Total – 100 
 
c. Focus of the e valuation : 
- Presentation Skills  
- Level of Work and Understanding(Level of Analysis, Design, Implementation, Testing, 
Result Analysis done for the project)  
- Project  Report  
- Viva/Question Answer  
- Demonstration of the project  
- Teamwork and Contribution  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 111 ---
103 
 Roles and Responsibilities : 
 
- HOD/Coordinator: The role of HOD/Coordinator is to coordinate with supervisor, 
internal examiner, external examiner and students. The HOD/Coordinator should monitor 
the students’ project progress in coordination with the re spective supervisors. The 
HOD/Coordinator is responsible for arranging the proposal defense, midterm and final 
defense.  The HOD/Coordinator should participate  and evaluate  proposal defense, 
midterm, and final defense.   
 
- Project Supervisor:  The role of project supervisor is to supervise s tudents’ project 
throughout the semester. The supervisor  should rigorously feedback and guide the 
students. Supervisor is to participate  and evaluate proposal defense, midterm, and final 
defense. The supervisor should monitor the progress of projects under supervision.  
 
- Internal Examiner:  The role of internal  examiner is to evaluate the students’ project 
during different evaluation phases of the project. The internal examiner should partici pate 
and evaluate  proposal defense, midterm, and final defense.   
 
- External Examiner:  The role of external examiner is to evaluate the students’ project 
during final defense evaluation. The examiner should participate  and evaluate viva voce 
and demonstrati on session  during the final defense . 
 
- Student: The role and responsibilitie s of student include development of the project, 
project report  preparation , and defending the project work through out each evaluation 
phases. Despite of project work being group wo rk, each student should have equal role 
and responsibilities in the project. Each student will be evaluated individually so student 
should be able to demonstrate his/her contribution in the project work individually.  
Students should maintain a log visits w ith their supervisors at different dates during their 
work.  The log should include technical feedbacks from their supervisors.  
 
Report Contents:  
1. Prescribed content flow for the project p roposal  
1. Introduction  
2. Problem Statement  
3. Objective s 
4. Methodology  
a. Requirement Identification  
i. Study of Existing S ystem  / Literature Review  
ii. Requirement Analysis  
b.  Feasibility Study  
i. Technical  
ii. Operational  
iii. Economic   
iv. Schedule (Gantt chart showing the project timeline)  

--- PAGE 112 ---
104 
 c. High Level Design of System (Methodology of the 
proposed sys tem/ Flow Charts/  Working Mechanism of Proposed System / 
Description of Algorithms ) 
5. Expected Outcome  
6. References  
 
2. Prescribed content flow  for the project r eport  
1. Cover & Title Page  
2. Certificate Page  
i. Supervisor Recommendation  
ii. Head / Program Coordinator, Supervisor , Internal and External 
Examiners’ Approval  Letter  
3. Acknowledgement  
4. Abstract Page  
5. Table of Contents  
6. List of Abbreviations, List of Figures, List of Tables  
7. Main Report  
8. References  
9. Bibliography  (if any)  
10. Appendices ( Screenshots +  Snippets of major source code components +  Log of 
visits to supervisor ) 
 
3. Prescribed c hapters in the main r eport  
 
1. Chapter 1: Introduction  
1.1. Introduction  
1.2. Problem Statement  
1.3. Objectives  
1.4. Scope and Limitation  
1.5. Development Methodology  
1.6. Report Organization  
 
2. Chapter 2: Background Study  and Literature Review  
2.1. Background Study (Description of fundamental theories, general concepts and 
terminologies related to the project)  
2.2. Literature Review (Review of the similar/relevant projects, theories and results by 
other researchers)  
 
3. Chapter 3: System Analysis  
3.1. System Anal ysis 
3.1.1.  Requirement Analysis  
i. Functional Requirements (Illustrated using use case diagram/use 
case descriptions)  
ii. Non Functional Requirements  
3.1.2.  Feasibility Analysis  
i. Technical  

--- PAGE 113 ---
105 
 ii. Operational  
iii. Economic  
iv. Schedule  
 
3.1.3.  Analysis (May be Structured or Object Oriented)  
If structured approach:  
 Data modelling using ER Diagrams  
 Process modelling using DFD  
 
If object oriented approach:  
 Object modelling using Class and Object Diagrams,  
 Dynamic modelling using State and Sequence Diagrams  
 Process modelling using Activity Diagrams  
 
4. Chapter 4 : System Design  
4.1. Design (May be Structured or Object Oriented  as per the approach followed in 
analysis  chapter ) 
If structured approach:  
 Database Design: Transformation of ER to relations and 
normalizations  
 Forms and Report Design  
 Interface and Dialogue Design  
  
If object oriented approach:  
 Refinement of Class, Object, State, Sequence and Activity 
diagram s 
 Component Diagrams  
 Deployment Diagrams  
4.2. Algorithm Details  
 
5. Chapter 5 : Implementation and Testing  
5.1. Implementation  
5.1.1.  Tools Used (CASE tools, Programming languages, Database platforms)  
5.1.2.  Implementation Details of Modules (Description of 
classes/procedures/functions/methods/algorithms)  
5.2. Testing  
5.2.1.  Test Cases for Unit Testing  
5.2.2.  Test Cases for System Testing  
5.3. Result Analysis  
 
6. Chapter 6 : Conclusion and Future Recommendations  
6.1. Conclusion  
6.2. Future Recommendations  
 

--- PAGE 114 ---
106 
 While writing above chapters students should avoid basic definitions. They should relate and 
contextualize the above mentioned concepts with their project work.  
 
Citation an d Referencing : 
 
The listing of references should be listed in the references section. The references contain the list  
of articles, books, urls , etc.  that are cited in the document. The books, articles, and others that are  
studied during the study but are no t cited in the document can be listed in the bibliography  
section.  The citation and referencing standard should be IEEE referencing standard. The text 
inside the  document should be cited in IEEE style. The IEEE referenci ng standard can be found 
in the web.  
 
 
Report Format Standards:  
A. Page Number  
The pages from certificate page to the list of tables/figures/abbreviations/approvals should be 
numbered in roman starting from i. The pages from chapter 1 onwards should be numbered in 
numeric starting from 1. The p age number should be inserted at bottom, aligned center.  
B. Page Size and Margin   
The paper size must be  a page size corresponding to A4. The margins must be set as    
 Top = 1 in (2.54 cm)  
 Bottom = 1 in (2.54 cm)  
 Left = 1.25 in (3.17 cm)  
 Right = 1 in (2.54 cm)  
C. Paragraph Style  
 All paragraphs must be justified and have  spacing of 1.5.  
D. Text Font of Document  
 The contents in the document should be in Times New Roman  font 
 The font size  in the paragraphs of document should be 12  
E. Section Headings  
 Font size for the headings should  be 16  for chapter headings , 14 for section headings, 12 for 
sub-section  headings . All the headings should be bold faced.  
F.  Figures and Tables  
 Position of figures and tables should be aligned center. The figure caption should be centred 
below the figure and table captions should be centred above the table.  All the captions 
should be of bold  face with 12 font size.  
 

--- PAGE 115 ---
107 
 Final Report Binding and Submission : 
 
No of Copies: 3 (College  Library + Self + Dean  Office ) 
 
Look and Feel: Golden Embracing with Black Binding  
 
A final approved signed copy of the rep ort should be submitted to the Dean O ffice, Exam 
Section, Institute of Science and Technology, Tribhuvan University  
 
Text Book:  None  

--- PAGE 116 ---
108 
 Information Retrieval  
 
Course Title: Information Retrieval      Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20 
Course No:  CSC4 13                Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab             Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII 
 
Course Description : 
This course familiarizes students with different concepts of informat ion retrieval techniques 
mainly focused on clustering, classification, search engine, ranking and query operations 
techniques.  
 
Course Objective : 
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different information retrieval 
techniques so that the students will be able to develop information retrieval  engine.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to IR and Web Search  (2 Hrs.) 
Introduction, Data vs Information Retrieval, Logical view of the documents , Architecture of IR 
System,  Web search  system, History of IR, Related areas  
 
Unit 2 : Text properties, operations and preprocessing  (5 Hrs.) 
Tokenization , Text Normalization , Stop-word removal , Morphological Analysis , Word 
Stemming (Porter Algorithm) , Case folding , Lemmatization , Word statistics (Zipf's law , Heaps’ 
Law), Index term  selection , Inverted  indices , Positional Inverted index, Natural Language 
Processing in Information Retrieval , Basic NLP tasks – POS tagging; shallow parsing  
 
Unit 3 : Basic IR Models ( 5 Hrs.) 
Classes  of Retrieval Model , Boolean  model, Term weighting mechanism – TF, IDF, TF -IDF 
weighting, Cosine Similarity , Vector space model , Probabilistic models (the binary 
independence model ,Language models; · KL -divergence; · Smoothing) , Non -Overlapping Lists , 
Proximal Nodes Mode  
 
Unit 4 : Evaluation of IR  (2 Hrs.) 
Precision, Recall, F -Measure, MAP (Mean Average Precision), (DCG) Discounted Cumulative 
Gain, Known -item Search Evaluation  
 
Unit 5 : Query Operations and Languages  (4 Hrs.) 
Relevance  feedback and pseudo relevance feedback, Query expansion  (with a thesaurus or 
WordNet  and correlation matrix ), Spelling correction (Edit distance, K – Gram indexes, Context 
sensitive spelling correction) , Query languages (Single -Word Queries, Context Queries, Boolean 
Queries, Structural Query, Natural Language)  
 
Unit 6: Web Search ( 6 Hrs.) 
Search engines  (working principle), Spidering (Structure of a spider, Simple spidering  algorithm, 
multithreaded spidering, Bot), Directed spidering (Topic directed, Link directed) , Crawlers 

--- PAGE 117 ---
109 
 (Basic crawler architecture), Link analysis ( HITS, Page ranking ), Query log analysis , Handling 
“invisible” Web – Snippet generation , CLIR (Cross Language Information Retrieval)  
 
Unit 7 : Text Categorization ( 4 Hrs.) 
Categorization, Learning for Categorization, General learning issues, Learning algorithms:  
Bayesian (naïve ), Decision tree, KNN, Rocchio)  
 
Unit 8 : Text Clustering ( 4 Hrs.) 
Clustering, Clustering  algorithms (Hierarchical clustering, k -means, k -medoid, Expectation 
maximization (EM), Text shingling)  
 
Unit 9 : Recommender System (3 Hrs .) 
Personalization , Collaborative filtering recommendation, Content -based recommendation  
 
Unit 10 : Question  Answering ( 5 Hrs.) 
Information bottleneck, Information Extraction, Ambiguities in IE, Architecture of QA system, 
Question processing, Paragraph retrieval, Answer processing  
 
Unit 11 : Advanced IR Models ( 5 Hrs.) 
Latent Semantic  Indexing (LSI), Singular value decomposition, Latent Dirichlet Allocation, 
Efficient string searching, Knuth – Morris – Pratt, Boyer – Moore Family, Pattern matching  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory should contain all the features mentioned in a course . The Laboratory work 
should contain at least following tasks  
1. Program to demonstrate the Boolean Retrieval Model and Vector Space Model  
2. Tokenize the words of large documents according to type and token  
3. Program to find the similarity between documents  
4. Implement Porter stemmer  
5. Build a spider that tracks only the link of nepali documents  
6. Group the online news onto different categorize like sports, entertainment, politics  
7. Build a recommender system for online music store  
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Modern Informat ion Retrieval, Ricardo Baez a-Yates, Berthier Ribeiro -Neto.  
2. Information Retrieval; Data Structures & Algorithms: Bill Frakes  

--- PAGE 118 ---
110 
 Database Administration  
 
Course Title: Database Administration     Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20 
Course No:  CSC4 14                Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab             Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII 
 
Course Description : 
This course familiarizes students with different concepts of database administration including 
DBA Roles  and responsibilities , tablespace and storage management, DB backup, restoration and 
recovery , security, multitenant, and performance tuning.  
 
Course Objective : 
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different  concepts of database 
administration so that the students will be able handle  
 Install DBMS  Software  
 Creat e and manage  database s 
 Manage backup and recovery   
 Control user security  
 Managing database performance and multitenant architecture  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1:  Introduction  (5 Hrs.)  
DBA Roles and Responsibilities ; Database Architecture ; ORACLE logical and physical database 
structure;  Memory and Process Structure , SQLPLUS Overview , creating a database ; 
 
Unit 2 : Tablespace and Storage management  (5 Hrs.)  
Working with Tablespaces and Data Files,  Creating and adding tablespace and datafiles,  
Managing Control Files, Online Redo Logs  and Archive logs ; Multiplexing;  
 
Unit 3 : Managing Database Objects  (8 Hrs.)  
Working with Tables and Constraints;  Working with Indexes, Views, Synonyms, and Sequences; 
Partitioning and Materialized Views , Introduction of PLSQL, Stored Procedure, Functions, 
Trigger, package.  
 
Unit 4 : Database Backup, Restore, and Recovery  (10 Hrs.)  
Backup and Recovery Overview, Database backup, restoration and recovery, defining a backup  
and recovery strategy,  Backup and Recovery options; Data Dump; User -Managed Backup and 
Recovery; Configuring RMAN; RMAN Backups , Restore and Recovery ; High Availability 
Features ; Oracle Data Guard ; Flashback operations.  
 
Unit 5: Database Security and Auditing  (7 Hrs.)  
Database Security and Auditing ; Database Authentication Methods; Database Authorization 
Methods; Data Encryption Techniques , Virtual Private Database;  Managing Users and Security: 
Profiles, managing  users, managing privileges, managing roles,  
 

--- PAGE 119 ---
111 
 Unit 6: Multitenant Database  Architecture  (5 Hrs.)  
Understanding  the Multitenant Architecture , Pluggable Architecture; Creating CDB; 
Administrating Root Container; Creating Pluggable Databases  (PDBs)  within a CDB; 
Administrating Pluggable Databases; Backup and Recovery in multitenant Environment;  
Databases in the Cloud   
 
Unit 7 : Database Tuning  (5 Hrs.)  
Tuning Application Design; Tuning Memory Usage; Tuning Data Access; Tuning Data 
Manipulation; Reducing Network Traffic; Using Automatic Workload Repository (AWR) ; 
Automatic Database Diagnostic Monitor (ADDM),  Tuning SQL; SQL Tuning Advisor , 
Performance Tuning in a Multitenant Environment ; Distribute d Databases and Networking Tool  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work should include all the concepts mentioned in the course  using any 
appropriate DBMS system . 
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Pro Oracle Database 18c Administration: Manage and Safeguard Your Organization’s 
Data, Michelle Malcher and Darl Kuhn, Third Edition . 
2. Oracle Database 12c DBA Handbook, Manage a Scalable, Secure Oracle Enterprise 
Database Environment, Bob Bryla . 
3. Oracle DBA Mentor: Succeding as an Oracle Database Administrator, Brian Peasland.  

--- PAGE 120 ---
112 
 Software Project Management  
 
Course Title: Software Project Management    Full Marks : 60+20+20  
Course No:  CSC415                                                                          Pass Marks : 24+8 + 8  
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3          
Semester: VII 
 
Course Description:  
This course familiarizes students with different concepts of software project management mainly  
focusing on project  analysis , scheduling, resource allocation, risk analysis, monitoring, control 
and software configuration management.  
 
Course Objectives:  
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of software 
project management  so that students will be able to understand and handle various projects 
including very high risky and innovative projects using different project  management skills.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to S oftware Project Management ( 5 Hrs.) 
Software engineering problem and software product, software product attributes, Definition of a 
Software Project (SP), SP Vs. other types of projects activities covered by SPM, categorizing 
SPs, Project management cycle, SPM framework, types of project plan . 
 
Unit 2:  Project Analysis ( 8 Hrs.) 
Introduction, strategic assessment, technical assessment, economic  analysis: Present worth, 
future worth, annual worth, internal rate of return (IRR) method, benefit -cost ratio analysis, 
including uniform gradient cash flow and comparison of mutually exclusive alternatives.  
 
Unit 3:  Activity Planning and Scheduling  (7 Hrs.) 
Objectives of activity planning, Work breakdown structure, Bar chart, Network planning model: 
Critical path method (CPM), Program evaluation and review technique (PERT), Precedence 
diagramming method (PDM), Shortening project duration, Identifying critical activities.  
 
Unit 4:  Risk Management (4 Hrs.) 
Introduction, nature and identification of risk, risk analysis, evaluation of risk to the schedule 
using Z -values.  
 
Unit 5: Resource Allocation (4  Hrs.) 
Identifying resource requirements, resource allo cation, resource smoothening and resource 
balancing.  
 
Unit 6: Monitoring  and Control ( 4 Hrs .) 
Introduction, collecting data, visualizing progress, cost monitoring, earned value analysis, project 
control.  
 
 

--- PAGE 121 ---
113 
 Unit 7: Managing Contracts and people  (5 Hrs.) 
Introduction, types of contract, stages in contract, placement, typical terms of a contract, contract 
management, acceptance, Managing people and organizing terms: Introduction, understanding 
behavior, organizational behavior: a back ground, selecting the rig ht person for the job, 
instruction in the best methods, motivation, working in groups, becoming a team, decision 
making, leadership, organizational structures, conclusion, further exercises.  
 
Unit 8:  Software quality assurance and testing ( 5 Hrs. )  
Testing  principles and objectives, test plan, types and levels of testing, test strategies, program 
verification and validation, software quality, SEI -CMM,SQA activities, QA organization 
structure, SQA plan.  
 
Unit 9:  Software Configuration Management  (3 Hrs.) 
Introduction, need, basic configuration, management function, baseline, configuration 
management responsibilities.  
 
Laboratory / Project Work:  
Students should prepare a project report using different concepts of software project 
management. The project can be done in groups with at most four members in each group. Each 
group can select a case study and apply the concepts of software project manag ement focusing 
on project analysis, scheduling, risk analysis, resource allocation, testing.  
 
Text Book:  
1. Software Project Management by Bob Hughes and Mike Cotterell, Latest Publication  
 
Reference Books:  
1. "Introduction to Software Project Management & Quality Assurance", Darrel Ince, I. 
Sharp, M. Woodman, Tata McGraw Hill  
2. "Software Project Management: A Unified Framework", Walker Royce, Addison -
Wesley, An Imprint of Pearson Education  
3. "Managing the Software Process", Watts S. Humphrey, Addison -Wesley, An  Imprint of 
Pearson Education  

--- PAGE 122 ---
114 
 Network Security  
 
Course Title: Network Security      Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No:  CSC416        Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester:  VII 
 
Course Description:  
This course covers the fundamental concepts of network security  protocols, wireless security 
concepts, basics of security in cloud and IoT.  
 
Course Objectives:  
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of network security so that students 
will be able to implement a secure network architecture using different security protocols and 
technologies.   
  
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Computer Network Securi ty Fundamentals (3  Hrs.)  
1.1.  Introduction  
1.2.  Securing the Computer  Network  
1.3.  Forms of Protection  
1.4.  Security Standards  
 
Unit 2: User Authentication  (4 Hrs.)  
2.1. Remote  User -Authentication Principles  
2.2. Remote User -Authentica tion Using Symmetric Encryption  
2.3. Remote User -Authenticat ion Using Asymmetric Encryption  
2.4. Federated Identity Management  
 
Unit 3 : Transport Level Security ( 6 Hrs.)  
3.1. Web Security  
3.2. Transport Layer Security (TLS)  
3.3. HTTPS  
3.4. Secure Shell ( SSH)  
  
Unit 4: Wireless Network Security  (6 Hrs.)  
4.1. Wireless Security  
4.2. Mobile Device Security  
4.3. IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN Overview  
4.4. IEEE 802.11i Wireless LAN Security  
 
Unit 5 : Electronic Mail Security  (8 Hrs.)  
5.1. Internet Mail Architecture  
5.2. E-mail Formats  
5.3. Email Threats a nd Comprehensive Email Security  
5.4. S/MIME  

--- PAGE 123 ---
115 
 5.5. Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)  
5.6. DNSSEC  
5.7. DNS -Based A uthentication of Named Entities  
5.8. Sender Policy Framework  
5.9. Domain Keys Identified Mail  
5.10. Domain -Based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance  
 
Unit 6 : IP Security  (6 Hrs.)  
6.1. IP Security Overview  
6.2. IP Security Policy  
6.3. Authentication Header  
6.4. Encapsulating Security Payload  
6.5. Security Associations  
6.6. Internet Key Exchange  
 
Unit 7 : Network Endpoint Security  (5 Hrs.)  
7.1. Firewalls  
7.2. Intrusion Detection System  
7.3. Malicious Software  
7.4. Distributed Denial of Service Attacks  
 
Unit 8 : Cloud and Internet of Things (IOT) Security  (7 Hrs.)  
8.1. Cloud Computing  
8.2. Cloud Security Concepts  
8.3. Cloud Sec urity Risks and Countermeasures  
8.4. Cloud Security as a Service  
8.5. Open -source Cloud Security Module  
8.6. Internet of Things (IoT)  
8.7. IoT Security Concepts and Objectives  
8.8. Open -source IoT Security Module  
 
 Laboratory Works:  
The laboratory work includes implementation and simulation of Network Security P rotocols, 
Intrusion D etection Systems, DDo S Attacks, Cloud Security and IoT Security Systems.  
 
Text Books:  
1. William Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security : Principles and Practice , 8th 
Edition, Pearson, 2020  
2. Joseph Migga Kizza, Computer Network Security Fu ndamentals, 5th Edition, Springer, 
2020  
 
Reference Books:  
1. William Stallings, Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, 6th Edition, 
Pearson, 2017  
2. Sarhan M. Musa, Network Security and Cryptography: A Self -Teaching Introduction, 
Mercury Learning and Information LLC, 2018  

--- PAGE 124 ---
116 
 Digital System Design  
 
Course Title: Digital System Design      Full Marks:  60 + 20 + 20  
Course No:  CSC417        Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester:  VII 
 
Course Description:  
This course contains the introductory part of combinational Logic along with the clear concepts 
of K -Maps and Quine - Mc Cluskey Method. It also introduces sequential networks with flip 
flops and FSM.  Another concept includes FPGA and VHDL and also testing  and verification.  
 
Course Objective:  
The course objective is to provide ample knowledge on digital design process and to enhance the 
knowledge of hardware design in real scenarios.  
 
Course Content:  
Unit 1  Introduction of logic design, Digital System and Integration, Electronic 
Design Automation, IC Manufacturing, Logic Families, IC Design 
Techniques, IC characteristics: fan -out, power dissipation, propagation 
delay, and noise margin of TTL and CMOS integrated circuit logic devices  5Hrs  
Unit 2 Review of Boolean Algebra and Combinational Logic, Canonical Form, 
Shannon's Expansion, Minterms, Maxterms, Prime Implication  4 Hrs. 
Unit 3 Combinational  Network Design: K – Map, Synthesis and Minimization 
with K – Maps  (AND – OR, OR -AND, NAND -NAND, NOR -NOR) , 
Standard Combinational Networks  5 Hrs. 
Unit 4 Quine - Mc Cluskey Method, Minimization of Boolean expression with 
Quine -Mc Cluskey method , PROMs and EPROMs, Programmable Array 
Logic (PAL),  Programmed Logic Array (PLA ), Gate Arrays, Programmable 
Gate Array, Full Custom Design  7 Hrs. 
Unit 5 Sequential Networks: Transition from combinational to sequential network, 
Direct command flip flop, Initialization of sequential network, Level 
Enabled Flip -Flops, Synchronization of sequential networks, Edge -triggered 
Flip Flops, Synchronous and Asynchronous Signals  8 Hrs. 
Unit 6 Sequential Networks as Finite State Machines: Standard Models, 
Realization with ASM Diagrams,  Synthesis of Synchronous FSM, Time 6 Hrs. 

--- PAGE 125 ---
117 
 Behavior of Synchronous FSM , Design of input forming, Logic and Output 
Forming Logic of state machine.  
Unit 7 Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA), VHDL and its use in 
programmable logic devices (PLDs) like FPGA  4 Hrs. 
Unit 8  Testing and Verification, Testing Logic Circuits, Combinational gate 
testing, Combinational network testing, Sequential Testing, Test vector 
generation, fault, fault model and fault detection, SA0, SA1, Design for 
Testability  6 Hrs.  
 
Laboratory Works:  
Laboratory Exercise should cover the implementation of combinational and sequential circuits, 
FSM, FPGA and VHDL.   Testing and verification of circuits . 
 
Project W ork: 
Design a sample of tool kit by using the design concepts of the course.  
 
Reference Books : 
1. Giuliano Donzellini, Luca Oneto , Domenico Ponta, Davide Anguita, Introduction to 
Digital System Design, Springer  
2. Wolf, Wayne, Modern VLSI Design -System on Silicon, Third Edition, Pearson   
3. Comer, David J. Digital Logic State Machine Design, Third Edition, Oxford University 
Press  
4. Ashenden , Peter J, The Student's Guide to VHDL, Morgan Kaufman  

--- PAGE 126 ---
118 
 International Marketing  
 
Course Title: International Marketing     Full Marks: 80 + 20  
Course No: MGT418                 Pass Marks:  32 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory              Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VII 
 
Course Objective:  
This course aims to provide an understanding of the process and dynamism of marketing 
practiced across the international markets.  
 
Course Description:  
This is a comprehensive course that deals on the process and challenges of international 
marketing. The course includes topics such as scope and challenges of international marketing, 
dynamism in international trade, the cultural, political, and legal international environment, 
global marketing strategies, regional and multinational trade arrangements, and s tructure and 
dynamism in Nepal’s international trade.  
 
 Course Contents:  
 Unit 1. Introduction  (6 Hrs.)   
Concept and growth of international marketing. International marketing tasks. Stages of 
international marketing involvement. Strategic orientations in international marketing. The 
dynamism in international trade – trade barriers, balance of payments, protectionism, tariffs, 
quotas, and embargoes. Movements against trade restrictions – GATT and WTO. Regional 
trading blocks.  
 
Unit 2. International Marketi ng Environment  (10 Hrs.)   
Cultural environment: Concept and origins of culture. Elements of culture. Cultural barriers in 
international trade. Importance of international cultural knowledge and cultural change in 
marketing. Political environment: Sovereign ty of nations. Political risks of international 
business. Political vulnerability assessment and risk minimization strategies. Legal environment: 
Bases of legal systems. Jurisdictions in international legal disputes and dispute resolution 
methods.  
 
Unit 3: International Marketing Research  Global Marketing Information System  (8 Hrs.)   
Concept and Scope of international marketing research. Process of research – problem 
identifi cation and research objectives. Concept and components of m arketing information 
system,  sources of global marketing information .  
 
Unit 4: International Marketing Management  (11 Hrs.)   
Product development for international markets – quality, green marketing, and adaptation issues. 
Marketing opportunities in services. Challenges of mana ging brands globally. International 
marketing channels – distribution patterns in international markets. Marketing intermediaries and 
choice factors. Communications – Integrated marketing communications in international 
marketing. International advertising  goals and strategy. International pricing – approaches to 
international pricing, p rice escalation and its effects . Transfer pricing strategy.  

--- PAGE 127 ---
119 
  
Unit 5: Nepal’s International Trade  (10 Hrs.)   
Structural dynamism in Nepal’s foreign trade. Import and export sources. Import and export 
procedures and documentations. Institutional mechanism for international trade – Public, private, 
and non -governmental agencies for trade and export promotions. Key problems in Nepal’s 
international trade. SAPTA and SAFTA.  
 
Recom mended Books : 
1. Cateora, Philip, John Graham, and Prasant Salwan, Internation al Marketing, Tata 
McGraw Hill.  
2. Terpstra, Vern and Ravi Sarathy, Interna tional Marketing, Dryden Press.  
3. Jain, Subhash, International Marketing Management, CBS Publications.  

--- PAGE 128 ---
120 
 Advanced Database  
 
Course Title: Advanced Database      Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 75       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description :  
This course includes advanced concept of database system. The main topics covered are 
advanced concept of relational data model, Extended E -R model, new database management 
technologies, query optimization, NoSQL database and big data processing techniques.  
 
Course Objectives : 
At the end of th e course students should be able to know new developments in database 
technology, interpret and explain the impact of emerging database standards, evaluate the 
contribution of database theory to practical implementations of database management systems. 
Also, students should be able to develop more advanced application using MapReduce and 
Hadoop.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Enhanced Entity Relationship Model and Relational Model (8  Hrs.) 
Entity Relationship Model Revised; Subclasses, Superclasses and Inheritan ce; Specialization and 
Generalization; Constraints and characteristics of specialization and Generalization ; Union 
Types; Aggregation; Relational Model Revised; Converting ER and EER Model to Relational 
Model; SQL and Advanced Features; Concepts of File St ructures, Hashing, and Indexing  
 
Unit 2: Object and Object Relational Databases (10  Hrs.) 
Object Database Concepts; Object Database Extensions to SQL; The ODMG Object Model and 
the Object Definition Language ODL; Object Database Conceptual Design; Object Query 
Language OQL; Language Binding in the ODMG Standard  
 
Unit 3: Query Processing and Optimization ( 7 Hrs.)  
Concept of Query Processing; Query Trees and Heuristics for Query Optimization; Choice of 
Query Execution Plans; Cost -Based Optimization  
 
Unit 4: Distributed Databases, NOSQL Systems, and BigData (12  Hrs.) 
Distributed Database Concepts and Advantages; Data Fragmentation, Replication and Allocation 
Techniques for Distributed Database Design; Types of Distributed Database Systems; 
Distributed Database  Architectures  
Introduction to NOSQL Systems; The CAP Theorem; Document -based, Key -value Stores, 
Column -based, and Graph -based Systems; BigData; MapReduce; Hadoop  
 
Unit 5: Advanced Database Models, Systems, and Applications (8 Hrs.)  
Active Database Concepts and Triggers; Temporal Database Concepts; Spatial Database 
Concepts; Multimedia Database Concepts; Deductive Database  Concepts; Introduction to 
Information Retrieval and Web Search  

--- PAGE 129 ---
121 
  
Laboratory Works:  
Students should implement different concept s of database system  studied in each unit of the 
course during lab time  and should submit a mini project at the end the course.  
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Elmasri and Navathe, Fundamentals of Database Systems, Pearson Education . 
2. Raghu Ramakrishnan, Johannes Gehrke, Database Management Systems, McGraw -Hill 
3. Korth, Silberchatz, Sudarshan, Database System Concepts, McGraw -Hill. 
4. Peter Rob and Coronel, Database Systems, Design, Implementation and Management, 
Thomson Learning.  
5. C. J. Date & Longman, Introduction to Database Systems, Pearson Education  
6. Tiwari, Shashank and Safari, professional Nosql, O'Reilly Media Company.  
7. Gunarathne, Thilina Hadoop MapReduce v2 Cookbook: Explore the Hadoop MapReduce v2.  
8. Ecosystem to Gain Insights from very Large Datasets, 2nd Edition, PACKT Publishing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 130 ---
122 
 Internship  
 
Course Title: Internship       Full Marks: 160+40  
Course No: CSC4 76       Pass Marks: 64 +16  
Nature of the Course: Internship      Credit Hrs: 6 
Semester:  VIII 
 
Course Description: This course covers the real -world practice in industry. It includes using  
theoretical and practical knowledge while wo rking in industry together with the understanding of 
industry culture.  
Course Objectives:   The objective of this course is to allow studen ts into market industry and 
gain real world experience. The course is expected to make students more pragmatic and 
professional.   
 
Course Details:  
Nature of Internship:  
 
The internship work should be relevant to the field of computer science and information 
technology. The nature internship may include design and development of software, hardware, 
network services, database systems etc. The internship durationshould be minimum of 180 hours 
or ten weeks.  The internship should be started tentatively by the 3rd week of start of eighth 
semester.  The internship host organizations can be software/hardware development companies, 
telecommunications companies, network and internet s ervice providers , financial organizations, 
health organizations  etc.  
 
The i nternship  is an individual activity. The student should be responsible for the timely 
completion of all the activities and projects assigned, maintaining the professional quality. Each 
student should be facilitated with a mentor at the intern organization and a supervisor at the 
college/campus. Student should inform the status of all assignments to the mentor and 
supervisor. The student is expected to communicate frequently with the  advisors on the progress 
and status of intern project(s)/activities. Each student must prepare and submit individual 
internship report on the basis of his/ her work done during the internship period. Students 
working in group at the same organization shoul d be able to distinguish their nature of work.  
 
Phases of Internship : 
 
The following are the phases of internship evaluation:  
1. Proposal Submission:  Students must submit and present internship proposal  planafter 
2nd weekof start of the internship.  
 
2. Mid-Term  Submission : Students must submit progress repor t and defend midterm 
progress of their internship  work in the 11thweek of the eight  semester . 
 
3. Final Submission:  Students must submit and defend  the internship work during last 
week of the eight semester but before final board examination. The final defense will be 

--- PAGE 131 ---
123 
 followed a viva voice conducted by an evaluation committee.Students must have to 
submit the internship final report to their respectiv e department of college/campus before 
at least 10 days of final defense date. The report should be submitted in standard format 
as prescribed. The hard/soft copy of report should be made available to the external 
before a week of presentation date.  
 
Provi sion of Supervision:  
 
There should be a regular faculty member of the college assigned as a supervisor. The role of 
supervisor i s to supervise the students through out the internshipperiod . A supervisor can 
supervise at most four internship  students in a se ction.  
 
Provision of Mentorship : 
 
There should be a regular employee of the intern providing organization  assigned as a mentor . 
The role of mentor is to guide the students through out the internshipperiod at the organization.   
 
Evaluation Scheme:  
 
1. ProposalDefense - 5% Marks of 200 (5 Marks Head/Program Coordinator + 5 Marks 
Supervisor)  
2. Midterm - 15% Marks of 200 (5 Marks Head/Program Coordinator + 25 Marks 
Supervisor)  
3. Final Defense - 80% Marks of 200  (100 Marks Mentor + 20 Marks Supervisor + 40 
Marks External)  
 
The evaluation committee and evaluation criteria should be as follow;  
 
a. Evaluation c ommittee  
- HOD/Coordinator  
- Project Supervisor   
- Mentor     
- External Examin er 
 
b. Marks Distribution : 
- Head / Program Coordinator – 10 
- Supervisor – 50 
- Mentor – 100 
- External  Examiner  – 40 
- Total – 200  
 
c. Focus of the e valuation  
- Presentation Skills  
- Level of Work Done and Understanding of Internship Activities  
- Internship  Report  
- Viva/Question Answer  

--- PAGE 132 ---
124 
 Report Contents:  
1. Prescribed content flow for the project p roposal  
1. Introduction  
2. Problem Statement  
3. Objective s 
4. Description of Internship Work/Project  
5. Internship Plan  
6. Expected Outcome  of Internship Activities  
7. References  
 
2. Prescribed content flowfor  the internship r eport  
1. Cover & Title Page  
2. Certificate Page  
i. Mentors’ Recommendation from Company  
ii. Supervisors’ Recommendation  
iii. Examiners’ Approval  Letter  
3. Acknowledgement  
4. Abstract Page  
5. Table of Contents  
6. List of Abbreviations, List of Figures, List of Tables, List of Abbreviations  
7. Main Report  
8. References  
9. Bibliography  (if any)  
10. Appendices ( Screen Shots/  Source Code s/ Work Logs etc… ) 
 
3. Prescribed c hapters in the main r eport  
 
1. Chapter 1: Introduction  
1.1. Introduction (Introduce the project/ work done during internship)  
1.2. Problem Statement  
1.3. Objectives  
1.4. Scope and Limitation  
1.5. Report Organization  
 
2. Chapter 2: Organization  Details and Literature Review  
2.1. Introduction to Organization  
2.2. Organizational Hierarchy  
2.3. Working Domains of Organization  
2.4.  Description of Intern Department/Unit  
2.5. Literature Review / Related Study  
 
3. Chapter 3 : Internship Activities  
3.1. Roles and Responsibilities  
3.2. Weekly log (Log should contain the list of technical activities performed)  
3.3. Description of the Project(s) Involved During Internship  

--- PAGE 133 ---
125 
 3.4. Tasks / Activities Performed (Technical details of the activities done during the 
internship)  
 
4. Chapter 4: Conclusion and Learning Outcomes  
4.1. Conclusion  
4.2. Learning Outcome  
 
Students should be able to relate and contextualize the above -mentioned concepts with their 
project work/activities done during internship at the host organization.  
 
Citation and Referencing  
 
The listin g of references should be listed in the references section. The references contain the list 
of articles, books, URLs that are cited in the document. The books, articles, and others that are 
studied during the study but are not cited in the docum ent can be listed in the bibliography 
section. The citation and referencing standard should be APA referencing standard. The text 
inside the document should be cited accordingly. The APA referencing standard can be found in 
the web at https://apastyle.apa.org/  
 
Report Format Standards  
A. Page Number  
The pages from certificate page to the list of tables/figures/abbreviations/approvals should be 
numbered in roman starting from i. The pages from chapter 1 onwards should be numbered in 
numeric starting from 1. The page number should be inserted at bottom, aligned center.  
B. Page Size and Margin   
 The paper size must be  a page size corresponding to A4. The margins must be set as    
Top = 1; Bottom = 1 ; Right = 1 ; Left 1.25  
C. Paragraph Style  
 All paragraphs must be justified and have  spacing of 1.5.  
D. Text Font of Document  
 The contents in the document should be in Times New Roman  font 
 The font size  in the paragraphs of document should be 12  
E. Section Headings  
 Font size for the headings should  be 16  for chapter headings ,14 for section headings, 12 for 
sub-section  headings . All the headings should be bold faced.  
F.  Figures and Tables  
 Position of figures and tables should be aligned center. The figure caption shoul d be centred 
below the figure and table captions should be centred above the table.  All the captions 
should be of bold face with 12 font size.  
 

--- PAGE 134 ---
126 
 Final Report Binding and Submission : 
 
No of Copies: 3 (College  Library + Self + Dean  Office ) 
 
Look and Feel: Golden Embracing with Black Binding  
 
A final approved signed copy of the rep ort should be submitted to the Dean O ffice, Exam 
Section, Institute of Science and Technology, Tribhuvan University  
 
Text Book:  None  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 135 ---
127 
 Advanced Networking with IPv6  
 
Course Title: Advanced Networking with IPv6   Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 77      Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab    Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description :  
The course covers principles underlying IPv6 Network Design, Internet routing protocols 
(unicast, multicast and unidirectional) with IPv6, algorithmic issues related to the Internet, IPv6 
Migration, measurement and performance, next generation Internet (IPv6, QoS) and applications.  
 
Course Objec tives : 
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of advanced 
networking with IPv6 including network design, routing, migration etc.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to Networking (6 Hrs.)  
1.1.OSI Model  
1.2.IPv4 addressing overview  
1.3.VLSM & CIDR  
1.4.Operational and managerial issues of Legacy IPv4 networking  
1.5.Introduction to smart networking  
1.6.Overview of Programmable networks: SDN and NFV  
1.7.IPv6 network migration status  
 
Unit 2: IP Next Generation (8 Hrs.)  
2.1.Internet Protocol  Version 6 (IPv6)  
2.2.History of IPv6  
2.3.IPv6 Header Format  
2.4.Features of IPv6  
2.5.IPv6 Addressing  
2.5.1.  Unicast addressing and its types  
2.5.2.  Anycast addressing  
2.5.3.  Multicast addressing and its scope  
2.6.Static and Dynamic addressing with IPv6  
2.7.IPv6 extension headers  
 
Unit 3: ICMPv6 and Neighbor Discovery (6 Hrs.)  
3.1.ICMPv6 General Message Format  
3.2.ICMPv6 Error and Information Message Types  
3.3.ICMPv6 features and its comparison with ICMPv4  
3.4.Neighbor Cache and Destination Cache  
3.5.Neighbor Discovery Processes and Messages  
3.6.Path MTU Discovery  
3.7.MLD overview  

--- PAGE 136 ---
128 
 Unit 4: Security and Quality of Service in IPv6 (4 Hrs.)  
4.1.Types of Threats  
4.2.Security Techniques  
4.3.IPSEC Framework  
4.4.QoS Paradigms  
4.5.QoS in IPv6 Protocols  
 
Unit 5: IPv6 Routing (5 Hrs.)  
5.1.RIPng  
5.2.OSPF for IPv6  
5.3.BGP extensions for IPv6  
5.4.PIM-SM & DVMRP for IPv6  
 
Unit 6: IPv4/IPv6 Transition Mechanisms  (8 Hrs.)  
6.1.Migration Strategies  
6.2.Tunneling, dual stack and translations  
6.3.Transition techniques  
6.3.1.  6RD  
6.3.2.  Dual -stack lite  
6.3.3.  Stateful/Stateless AFT  
6.3.4.  464XLAT, CGNAT  
6.3.5.  Other recent techniques  
 
Unit 7: Future networking (8 Hrs.)  
7.1.Operation of SDN and NFV  
7.2.Introduction to SDN based IPv6 Networking  
7.3.SDN migration methods and practices  
7.4.Features of Software -Defined IPv6 Networks (SoDIP6)  
7.5.SoDIP6 Network Deployment: Challenges and Risks  
7.6.SoDIP6 based NGN  
7.7.Routing in Multi -Domain SoDIP6 Netwo rks 
 
Laboratory work:  
For the lab work, one PC to one student either in virtual environment or real environment will be 
provided. Students will be divided into group of 3 students. The working environment and 
machine connectivity will look like the follo wing:  
 


--- PAGE 137 ---
129 
 Tools Needed:  TCPDUMP & WIRESHARK, VMWare Environment, Linux/FreeBSD, 
Windows  
Lab 1: Enable IPv6 in Windows/Linux  
Lab 2: IPv6 Header Analysis  
Lab 3: IPv6 Packet analysis (neighbor/router solicitation/discovery)  
Lab 4: Unicast Routing Implementation using Zebra -OSPF & OSPF phase analysis  
Lab 5: Multicast Routing Implementation using XORP -PIM/SM & PIM/SM phase analysis  
Lab 6: SDN enabled IPv6 network implementaion with Mininet  
Lab 7: ONOS, SDN -IP implementation for routing implementaiotn in SoDIP6 network  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Silvia Hagen: IPv6 Essentials, O’reilly  
2. Joseph Davies: Understanding IPv6; eastern economy edition  
3. SDN and NFV simplified: A Visual Guide to Understanding So ftware Defined Networks and 
Network Function Virtualization, by Jim Doherty  
 
Prerequisite: Networking & Communications Fundamentals  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 138 ---
130 
 Distributed Networking  
 
Course Title: Distributed Networking     Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 78       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
The course covers overview of distributed networking model, client server model, 
communication models, internetworking, interprocess com munication, fault tolerance, reliability, 
replication, security issues and new developments in distributed networking . 
 
Course Objectives:  
The course objective to make the students familiar with Distributed Network Systems, its 
models, communication paradigms, related protocols and architectures, its reliability and 
replication systems, and security issues. It also briefly introduces the current developments in 
distributed networking.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1  Overview: Distributed Systems, Computer Ne tworks, Protocols and QoS, 
Software for Distributed Computing, Agent – based computing model  4 Hrs.  
Unit 2  Client Server Model: Issues, Client Server Model in Distributed Computing 
System, Cooperation between clients and servers, Extensions to the Client 
Server Model, Service Discovery, Client Server Interoperability  8 Hrs.  
Unit 3  Communication Paradigm: Message and message passing mechanisms, 
Remote Procedure Calls, Remote Method Invocation, Distributed Shared 
Memory, its design and implementation and co nsistency models  6 Hrs.  
Unit 4  Internetworking: Communication Protocol Architectures, TCP/IP Protocol 
Suite, IPv6  5 Hrs.  
Unit 5  Interprocess communication using message passing: Developing distributed 
applications using message passing, sockets and syste m calls  5 Hrs.  
Unit 6  Reliability and Replication Techniques: Fault Tolerance, Reliability, 
Availability, Failure Classification, Techniques to achieve reliability, 
Reliability Modelling, Fault Tolerant Distributed Algorithms, Replication 
and reliability,  Replication schemes and consistency  7 Hrs.  
Unit 7  Security: Secure Networks, Security Mechanisms on Internet, DDoS 
Attacks, Active and Passive Defense against DDoS attack  6 Hrs.  
Unit 8  Current Developments in Distributed Network System: Introduction and  
characteristics of Cluster Computing, Grid Computing, P2P Computing, 
Pervasive Computing  4 Hrs.  
 
Laboratory Works:  
Laboratory exercise should consist of tasks related configuration of distributed system, client 
server applications, message passing, remo te method invocation, remote procedure calls, socket 
and system calls, and reliability and replication techniques.  
 

--- PAGE 139 ---
131 
 Text Book:  
1. Weijia Jia, Wanlei Zhou, Distributed Network Systems from Concept to Implementation, 
Springer  
 
Reference Books:  
1. HagitAttiya, Jennifer Welch, Distributed Computing: Fundamentals, Simulations and 
Advanced Topics, 2nd Edition, March 2004  
2. Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms – Andrew Tanenbaum and Maarten van 
Steen, Prentice Hall, 2007  
 
Prerequisite:  Networking and Communic ation Fundamentals  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 140 ---
132 
 Game Technology  
 
Course Title: Game Technology      Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 79       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description :  
This course is a practical and conceptual introduction to game design and development including 
basic ideas of game design, learn to design a game, and working as a game designer. This course 
will provide ample opportunities to try out concepts and theorie s to design, develop and test 2D 
and 3D games. The main platform will be Unity, a cross -platform game editor and engine widely 
in use by many companies in the game industry.  
 
Course Objectives : 
After completion of the course, students will learn  
 basics of game development  
 to design games  
 to work as a game designer  
 to use Unity game editor and engine to develop games  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Game Design Basics (1 2 Hrs.)  
Role of the Game Designer: An Advocate for the Player, Passions and Skills, A Playcentric 
Design Process, Designing for Innovation; Structure of Games: Engaging the Player, The Sum of 
the Parts, Defining Games, Beyond Definitions; Working with Formal Elements: Players, 
Objectives, Procedures,  Rules, Resources, Conflict, Boundaries,  Outcome; Working with 
Dramatic Elements: Challenge, Play, Premise, Character, Story, World Building, The Dramatic 
Arc; Working with System Dynamics: Games as Systems, System Dynamics, Interacting with 
Systems, Tuning Game Systems  
 
Unit 2: Designing a Game  (25 Hrs.)  
Conceptualization: Where Do Ideas Come From, Alternative Methods, Editing and Refining, 
Turning Ideas into a Game, Ideas vs. Designs; Prototyping: Methods of Prototyping, Prototyping 
Your Original Game Idea, Making the Physical Prototype Better,  Beyond the Physical Prototype; 
Digital Prototyping: Types, Designing Control Schemes, Selecting Viewpoints, Effective 
Interface Design, Prototyping Tools; Playtesting: Playtesting and Iterative Design, Recruiting 
Playtesters, Conducting a Playtesting Sess ion, Methods of Playtesting, The Play Matrix, Taking 
Notes, Basic Usability Techniques, Data Gathering, Test Control Situations, Playtesting Practice; 
Functionality, Completeness, and Balance: What Are You Testing For? Is Your Game 
Functional?  Is Your Gam e Internally Complete? Is Your Game Balanced? Techniques for 
Balancing Your Game; Fun and Accessibility: Is Your Game Fun? Improving Player Choices, 
Fun Killers, Beyond Fun, Is Your Game Accessible ? 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 141 ---
133 
 Unit 3: Working as a Game Designer ( 8 Hrs.)  
Team Struc tures: Team Structure, Developer’s Team, Publisher’s Team, Team Profile, All 
Contribute to the Design, Team Communication; Stages and Methods of Development: Stages, 
Using Agile Development; Communication your Designs: Visualization, Flowcharts, Tables and  
Spreadsheets, Concept Art, Description, Formats, Contents, Design Macros; Understanding the 
New Game Industry: Size, Platform for Distribution, Genres of Gameplay, Publishers, 
Developers, The Business of Game Publishing; Selling Yourself and Your Ideas to  the Game 
Industry: Getting a Job at a Publisher or Developer, Pitching Your Original Ideas, Independent 
Production  
 
Laboratory Works:  
The Laboratory work includes designing and developing games using Unity game editor and 
engine.  
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Tracy Fullerton, Game Design Workshop: A Playcentric Approach to Creating Innovative 
Games, Fourth Edition, CRC Press, 2019.  
2. The Digital Gaming Handbook, Edited by Roberto Dillon, CRC Press, 2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 142 ---
134 
 Distributed and Object Oriented Database  
 
 
Course Title: Distributed and Object Oriented Database  Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 80      Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab    Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
This course aims to discuss concepts of distributed and object oriented database management 
systems. Main focus is given to basic concepts of DDBMS, distributed database design, 
distributed query processing, distributed concurrency control, concepts of OODBMS, and 
language and design of object o riented database.  
 
Course Objectives:  
 Discuss basic concepts related to distribute DBMS.  
 Exemplify design of distributed database.  
 Describe distributed query processing and concurrency control.  
 Discuss basic concepts of OODBMS.  
 Demonstrate language and design for distributed database.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to Distributed Database (4 Hrs.)  
Distributed Data Processing, Distributed Database Systems, Promises of DDBS, Complicating 
Factors, Design Issues of DDBMS, and Distributed DBMS Architectures: Autonomy, 
Distribution, Heterogeneity DDBMS Architecture – Client/Server, Peer to peer, MDBS.  
 
Unit 2: Distributed Database Design and Access Control (4 Hrs.) 
Top-Down Design Process, Distribution Design Issues, Fragmentation, Allocation, Da ta 
Directory, View Management, Data Security, Semantic Integrity Control.  
 
Unit 3: Query Processing, Decomposition, and Localization (6 Hrs.)  
Query Processing Problem, Objectives of Query processing, Complexity of RA Operations, 
Characterization of Query P rocessors, Layers of Query Processing, Query Decomposition, 
Localization of Distributed Data.  
 
Unit 4: Distributed Concurrency Control(8 Hrs.)  
Serializability Theory, Taxonomy of Concurrency Control Mechanisms, Lock Based 
Concurrency Control Algorithms, Ti me-Stamp Based Concurrency Control Algorithms, 
Optimistic Concurrency Control Algorithms, Deadlock management.  
 
Unit 5:  Object Oriented Database Concepts (6 Hrs.)  
Overview of Object -Oriented Concepts, Object Identity, Object Structure, and Type 
Constructo rs, Encapsulation of Operations, Methods, and Persistence, Type Hierarchies and 
Inheritance, Complex Objects, Other Objected -Oriented Concepts  
 

--- PAGE 143 ---
135 
 Unit 6: OODBMS Languages and Design (6 Hrs.)  
Object Model, Object Definition Language, Object Query Language, Ob ject Database 
Conceptual Design, Examples of ODBMSs.  
 
Laboratory Works:  
Students should implement all the concepts of object oriented and distributed databases 
mentioned in the course.  
 
Text Books:  
1. M. Tamer Özsu and Patrick Valduriez, Principles of Distributed Database Systems, Fourth 
Edition, Springer, 2019.  
2. ElmasriRamez and NavatheShamkant, Fundamentals of Database System, Seventh Edition, 
Pearson Education, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 144 ---
136 
 Introduction  to Cloud Computing  
 
Course Title: Introduction to Cloud Computing    Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 81       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
This course covers differen t concepts of cloud computing including introduction, architectures, 
cloud virtualization, programming models, security, and platforms and applications of cloud 
computing.  
 
Course Objectives:  
The main objective of this course is to provide theoretical as well as practical knowledge of 
cloud computing including designing, implementing and managing the cloud computing.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1:  Introduction to Cloud Computing (6 Hrs.)  
Evolution  of Cloud Computing, Characteristics of Cloud Computing, Types of cloud and its 
Cloud services, Benefits and challenges of cloud computing, Applications cloud computing, 
Cloud Storage, Cloud services requirements, cloud and dynamic infrastructure, Cloud ad option  
 
Unit 2: Cloud Computing Architecture (6 Hrs.)  
Platform as service, Software as a service, Infrastructure as service, Public clouds, Private 
clouds, Community cloud, Hybrid clouds, Cloud design and implementation using SOA, 
security, trust and privacy  
 
Unit 3: Cloud Virtualization technology (10 Hrs.)  
Introduction to Virtualization, different types of Virtualization, Implementation Levels of 
Virtualization   Structures, Benefits of virtualization, server virtualization, virtualization 
software, Types of Hypervisor, and Load balancing, Infrastructure requirement for virtualization  
 
Unit 4: Cloud Programming Models (12 Hrs .) 
Thread programming, Task programming, Map -reduce programming, Parallel   efficiency of 
Map-Reduce, Enterprise batch processin g using Map -Reduce, Comparisons between Thread, 
Task and Map reduce  
 
Unit 5: Cloud security (6 Hrs .) 
Cloud Security issues, challenges and Risks, Software -as-a-Service Security, Security 
Monitoring, Security Architecture Design, Data and application Secur ity, Virtual Machine 
Security, Legal issues and Aspects, Multi -tenancy issues  
 
Unit 6: Cloud Platforms and Applications (12 Hrs .) 
Web services, AppEngine, Azures Platform, Aneka, Open challenges, Scientific 
applications,Business and Consumer applications  
 

--- PAGE 145 ---
137 
 Laboratory Works : 
The practical work consists of all features of cloud computing.  
 
Text Books : 
1. Dr. Kumar Saurabh, Cloud Computing  
2. Raj Kumar Buyya, Christian Vecchiola, S. ThamaraiSelvi, Mastering Cloud Computing  
 
Reference Books : 
1. David S. Linthicum, Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in your enterprise  
2.  Barrie Sosinsky, Cloud Computing Bible  
3. Saurabh, K. (2011). Cloud Computing – Insights into New -Era Infrastructure, Wiley India.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 146 ---
138 
 Geographical Information System  
 
Course Title: Geographical Information System    Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 82       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
The course covers about spatial data structure, modeling and database design, different 
techniques for capturing the real world, spatial data manipulation, analysis and visualization, 
spatial data infrastructure and data standardization, overview of open GIS and open source GIS 
data.  
 
Course Objectives:  
The main obj ective of this course is to provide both theoretical and practical knowledge of 
Geographical Information System.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to Geographic Information System (GIS)  (5 Hrs.)  
1.1 Overview, concepts of GIS, components of GIS  
1.2 Origin of GIS, History of GIS and geospatial technology  
1.3 Functions and benefits of GIS  
1.4 Scope and application areas of GIS  
1.5 Data base management system (DBMS) and concept of spatial and attribute data  
 
Unit2: Digital Mapping Concept s and Visualization  (5 Hrs.)  
2.1 Database and mapping concept: geographic features and attributes, thematic maps, map 
layers, map scales, resolution and representation  
2.2 Map outputs and elements, map design and layout  
2.3 Map projection: coordinate systems, projec tion systems, common map projections in 
GIS, conversion among coordinate systems  
 
Unit 3: Spatial Data Structure and Database Design  (6 Hrs.)  
3.1 concepts of geographic phenomena and data modeling, geographic objects and fields  
3.2 vector data and raster data model  
3.3 spatial relationships and topology  
3.4 GIS data formats and data conversion  
3.5 Spatial database design with the concepts of geo -database  
 
Unit 4: Data Acquisition, Data Quality and Management  (9 Hrs.)  
4.1 different methods of data capture  
4.2 geo -referencing and digitization  
4.3 data preparation, conversion and integration  
4.4 spatial data quality and accuracy  
4.5 introduction to global navigation and satellite systems (GNSS)  
4.6 Basics of remote sensing (RS) technology  

--- PAGE 147 ---
139 
 4.7 integration of RS and GNSS data into GIS  
Unit 5: Spatial Analysis  (10 Hrs.)  
5.1 vector data analysis: geo -processing, overlay analysis, buffering, network analysis  
5.2 raster analysis: local operations, focal operations, zonal operations, re -sampling, mosaic 
and clip, distance measurement  
5.2 spatial interpolation techniques, geo -statistics, GIS modeling  
5.3 GIS programming and customization: Opening and exploring Model Builder, Python 
script tools, Customizing QGIS with Python  
 
Unit 6: Introduction to Spatial Data Infrastructure  (3 Hrs.)  
6.1 SDI concepts, components of SDI and trends  
6.2 The concept of metadata and clearing house  
6.3 System Architecture for SDI Interoperability, Client Server Architecture, SDI 
technologies  
6.4 legal aspects of SDI  
 
Unit 7: Open GIS (7 Hrs.)  
7.1 Introduction of open concept in GIS  
7.2 Open source software for spatial data analysis  
7.3 Web Based GIS system  
7.4 Open source GIS data   
7.5 GIS application case studies  
 
Laboratory work:  
The lab should cover at least the concepts given in each chapter.  
 
Recommended B ooks:  
1. Chang, K. T.  Introduction to geographic information systems . Ninth edition, Boston: 
McGraw -Hill. 
2. Principles of geographic information systems: An introductory textbook,  international 
institute for Geo -information science and Earth observation, the Netherlands - By rolf De By, 
Richard A. knippers, yuxian sun  
3. ESRI guide to GIS analysis Andy Mitchell, ESRI press, Red lands  
4. GIS Cook BOOK  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 148 ---
140 
 Decision Support System and  Expert System  
 
Course Title: Decision Support System and Expert System   Full Marks: 60+ 20+20  
Course No:  CSC4 83       Pass Marks:  24+8+8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
This course is a  study  uses of artificial intelligence in business decision making. Emphasis will 
be given in business decision making process, design and development of decision support 
systems and expert systems.  
 
Course Objectives : 
 Introduce intelligent business decision mak ing  
 Discuss design, development and evaluation of DSS Systems  
 Discuss various models of building DSS systems  
 Explain Concept behind expert systems  
 
Course Content s: 
Unit 1: Business Decision Making (10 H rs.) 
1.1. Supporting Business Decision Making: Introduction, History, Conceptual Perspective, 
Decision Support vs. Transaction Processing System, Categories of DSS Applications and 
Products, DSS Framework, Building Decision Support Systems  
1.2. Gaining Competitive Advantage with Decision Support Systems: In troduction, Technology 
Trends, Gaining Competitive Advantage, Examples of Strategic DSS, Opportunities and IS 
Planning, DSS Benefits, Limitations, and  Risks, Resistances to Using DSS  
1.3. Business Decision Making Process: Introduction, Managerial Decisions, Dec ision Making 
Context, Decision Making Process, Good Decision Making, Redesigning Decision Making 
Process  
 
Unit 2: Designing, Developing, and Evaluating DSS Systems (10Hrs.)  
2.1. Designing and Evaluating DSS Systems: Introduction, Design and Development Issues, 
Decision Oriented Diagnosis, Prepare a Feasibility Study, Choose a Development 
Approach, DSS Project Management and Participants.  
2.2. Designing and Evaluating DSS User Interfaces:Introduction, Overview of User Interface, 
User Interface Styles, ROMC Design Appro ach, Building DSS User Interface, Comments 
on Design Elements, Guidelines of Dialog and UI Design, Factors of UI Design Success.  
2.3. DSS Architecture, Networking, and Security Issues:Introduction, DSS Architecture and IT 
Infrastructure, Networking Issues, Imp roving Security for Decision Support Systems.  

--- PAGE 149 ---
141 
 Unit 3 : Building DSS Systems (10 Hrs.)  
3.1. Implementing Communication -Driven and Group Decision Support Systems, Building Data 
and Document Driven Decision Support Systems, Building Knowledge Driven Decision 
Support Systems, Building Model Driven Decision Support Systems, Building Web Based 
and Interorganizational Decision Support Systems, Evaluating DSS Projects  
 
Unit 4 : Expert Systems (8 Hrs.)  
4.1. Definition and Features of Expert Systems, Architecture and Compo nents of Expert 
Systems, Persons Who Interact with Expert Systems, Advantages and Disadvantages of 
Expert Systems, Expert Systems Development Life Cycle, Error Sources on Expert System 
Development  
 
Unit 5 : Fuzzy Expert Systems (7 Hrs.)  
5.1. Fuzzy Rule, Fuzzy Re asoning, Need of Fuzzy Expert Systems, Operations on Fuzzy Expert 
Systems, Fuzzy Inference Systems, Fuzzy Inference Process, Types of Fuzzy Expert 
Systems, Fuzzy Controller.  
 
Laboratory Work: Student should study some widely used decision support systems and expert 
systems. Besides, student need to develop decision support systems or expert systems as a mini -
project.  
 
Text Books : 
1. Daniel J. Power, Decision Support Systems: Concepts and Resources for Managers, 
Illustrated Edition, Praeger . 
2. I. Gupta and G. Nag pal, Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems,Mercury Learning & 
Information , 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 150 ---
142 
 Mobile Application Development  
 
Course Title : Mobile Application Development    Full Marks :60+20+20  
Course No : CSC4 84       Pass Marks :24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the course : Theory + Lab      Credit Hrs : 3 
Semester : VIII 
 
Course Description : 
This course introduces mobile application development frameworks, architectures, design and 
engineering issues, techniques, methodologies for mobile application development.  
 
Course  Objective : 
The main objective of this co urse is to provide knowledge of understanding characterization and 
architecture with designing and developing of mobile applications.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction to Mobile Computing  (5 Hrs.) 
Introduction to Mobile Computing, 3 -tier architecture of mobile computing, History of mobile, the 
evolution of devices (Brick era, Candy bar era, Feature phone era, Smartphone era, Touch era), 
Introduction to mobile application development frameworks (Swif tic, React Native, Xamarin, 
Ionic, Sencha, Adobe PhoneGap), Mobile ecosystem, Mobile application development 
environments, Factors in Developing Mobile Applications (Mobile Software Engineering, 
Framework and tools, User interface), Adding dimensions of mo bile computing  
 
Unit 2: Architecture, Design and Mobile Development Frameworks  (10 Hrs.) 
Mobile computing architectures, Fully centralized and client server architectures, N -tier 
architecture, Mobile information architecture, Mobile design, The mobile desi gn tent -pole, 
Elements of mobile design, Designing for right device and different size screen, Fully centralized 
framework, N -tier client server framework, Mobile operating system and Virtual machine, 
Hardware specific tools and frameworks, BREW (Binary Ru ntime Environment for Wireless), 
BREW SDK, Building and deploying BREW application, WAP Architecture, WAP UI, WAP 
proxies and gateways, Multimedia messaging services, WAP push, security, Publishing 
frameworks (cocoon architecture)  
 
Unit 3: User Interfaces  (10 Hrs.) 
Generic UI development, Human factors, Elements of the user interfaces (channels, interaction, 
prompts, response, commands, menus, forms, natural language), Resource files, Using UI 
widgets, Event driven programming, Context, (Taxonomy of context  by domain, Extrinsic and 
Intrinsic context), User interface components, XForms, Developing mobile GUI, MVC, PAC, 
VUIs and mobile apps, Qualities of speech, Voice transcription, Voice recognition (Speech 
Grammar), Text to speech technologies, Speech synthe sis, Multichannel and Multimodal UIs  
 
Unit 4: Testing and Publishing Apps  (5 Hrs.) 
Mobile application build and delivery, Testing mobile applications, Automated versus Manual 
testing, Testing the mobile infrastructure, Coding standards, Unit testing, Black  box testing, 
White box testing, Regression testing, App distribution through App stores, Monetizing Apps  

--- PAGE 151 ---
143 
 Unit 5:Mobile Agent and Peer -to-Peer Architectures for Mobile Applications  (3 Hrs.) 
Basics of Agent technologies, Mobile agents for mobile computing, Peer to peer applications for 
mobile computing, JXTA  
 
Unit 6:Wireless Connectivity and Mobile Applications (3 Hrs.)  
Modulation and Transmission techniques, Short range and long range wirele ss communication, 
Security in wireless network, Bluetooth security, Security in long range wireless networking 
technologies, Mobile IP, SMS  
 
Unit 7:Synchronization and Replication of Mobile Data (3 Hrs.)  
Taxonomy of synchronization and replication, Scalabi lity issues, Solving the mobile 
synchronization, Bluetooth synchronization, Working with the content provider  
 
Unit 8:Location and Sensing  (4 Hrs.) 
Mobility and location based service, Data acquisition of location information, GPS based 
solution, Non GPS s olution, Using GIS for mobile applications, Location information modeling, 
Location based service, Architecture for offering location services, Security and privacy of 
location information  
 
Unit 9:Active Transactions  (2 Hrs.) 
Active computing and wireless infrastructure, WAP Push, Mobile IP and Push, Session initiation 
protocol  
 
Laboratory Works: The laboratory should contain all the features mentioned in a course , which 
should include  
 Language overview (Java, Object oriented concept)  
 Basic Concept of Android application architecture  
o source, resource folder concept  
o Terminology for android  
 Concept of android Layouts  
o Concept of Linear layout, Relative layout, toolbar  
o Concepts of list view, recycler view, grid view, scroll view, view pag er, tab 
Layout  
o Create form and form validation  
o Alert Dialogs, Toast  
o Popup  
 Shared Preference  
 Menu  
o Option menu, context menu  
 Introduction to Activity, Fragment  
o Simple activity information  
o Working with intents  
 Theme and Style  
 Database  
o Simple overview to datab ase (simple query)  
o SQLite overview  

--- PAGE 152 ---
144 
  API Implementation  
o Working with volley  
o Working with Retrofit  
 Advanced  
o Thread  
o JSON Parsing  
o Google Play Service (Maps, GPS)  
o FCM (Firebase Cloud Messaging)  
 
Text Books:      
1. Mobile Computing Principles: Designing and Developing Mobile Applications with UML 
and XML, Reza B’Far, Cambridge University Press, 2005   
2. Mobile Design and Development, Brian Fling, O’Reilly, 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 153 ---
145 
 Real Time System s 
 
Course Title: Real Time Systems      Full Marks : 60+20+20  
Course No:  CSC4 85                                                                         Pass Marks : 24+8 + 8  
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs: 3          
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:   
This course familiarizes students with differen t concepts of real time systems mainly focusing on 
scheduling, access control, memory management, optimization, and real time communications.  
 
Course Objective :    
The main objective of this course is to provide core knowledge of different concepts of real  time 
system which will enhance the student capacity in building real time systems.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Introduction (4 Hrs.)  
Definition, Hard, Soft and Firm Real Time System, Real Time Vs. Embedded System, Timing 
Constraints, Application of Real Time System, Brief Survey of Real Time Programming: Ada 
95, C, C++, C#, Fortran, Java, Occam 2, Special Real -Time Languages  
 
Unit 2: Reference Model of Real Time System (4 Hrs.)  
Processor and Resources, Temporal Parameters of Real -Time Workload, Periodic and Aperiodic 
Task Model, Precedence Constraints and Data Dependency, Other Dependencies, Functional 
Parameters, Resource Parameters of Jobs and Parameters of Resources  
 
Unit 3: Periodic Task Scheduling (7 Hrs.)  
Clock Driven Scheduling – Definition, Notati ons and Assumption, Scheduler Concepts, General 
Scheduling Structure, Cyclic Executives. Priority Driven Scheduling - Notations and 
Assumption, Fixed Priority Verses Dynamic Priority, Fixed Priority Scheduling Algorithms (RM 
and DM) and their Schedulabilit y Analysis, Concept of Schedulability Tests – Inexact and Exact 
Schedulability Tests for RM and DM, Optimality of the RM and DM Algorithms, Practical 
Factors.  
 
Unit 4: Aperiodic Task Scheduling (7 Hrs.)  
Aperiodic Task Scheduling: Assumption and Approaches,  Server Based and Non -Server Based 
Fixed Priority Scheduling Algorithms: Polling Server, Deferrable Server, Simple Sporadic 
Server, Priority Exchange, Extended Priority Exchange, Slack Stealing. Introduction to 
Scheduling of Flexible Computations: Flexible  Applications, Imprecise Computation Model and 
Firm Deadline Model. Introduction to Scheduling of Flexible Computations –Flexible 
Applications, Imprecise Computation Model and Firm Deadline Model.  
 
Unit 5: Real -Time  Memory  Management  (5 Hrs.)  
Process  Stack  Management,  Multiple -Stack  Arrangements,  Memory  Management  in the Task -
Control -Block  Model,  Swapping,  Overlays,  Block  or Page  Management,  Memory  Locking,  
Working  Sets,  Real-Time  Garbage  Collection,  Contiguous  File Systems   

--- PAGE 154 ---
146 
  
Unit 6: Resources  and Resource  Access  Control  (5 Hrs.)  
Assumptions  on Resources  and their Usage,  Effects  of Resources  Contention  and Resource  Access  
Control,  Non Preemptive  Critical  Sections,  Basic  Priority -Inheritance  Protocol,  Basic  Priority -
Ceiling  Protocol,  Stack -Based,  Priority -Ceiling (Ceiling -Priority)  Protocol,  Use of Priority -Ceiling  
Protocol  In Dynamic -Priority  System,  Preemption -Ceiling  Protocol,  Controlling  Accesses  to 
Multiple -Unit Resources,  Controlling  Concurrent  Accesses  to Data Objects  
 
Unit 7: Performance  Analysis  and Optimization  of Real -Time  Systems  (6 Hrs.)  
Challenges  in Analyzing  Real-Time  Systems,  Performance  Analysis:  Analysis  of Round -Robin  
Systems,  Response -Time  Analysis  for Fixed -Period  Systems,  Response -Time  Analysis:  RMA  
Example,  Analysis  of Sporadic  and Aper iodic  Interrupt  Systems,  Performance  Optimization:  
Compute  at Slowest  Cycle,  Scaled  Numbers,  Binary  Angular  Measure,  Optimizing  Memory  
Usage;  Analysis  of Memory  Requirements;  Reducing  Memory  Utilization:  Variable  Selection,  
Memory  Fragmentation   
 
Unit 8: Real Time Communication  (7 Hrs.)  
Introduction, Model of Real -Time Communication, Real Time Traffic Model, Real Time 
Connections and Service Disciplines, Priority – Based Service Disciplines for Switched 
Network, Weighted Round -Robin Service Disciplines, Me dium Access -Control Protocols of 
Broadcast Networks, Internet and Resource Reservation Protocols, Real -Time Protocol  
 
Laboratory  Work  / Case Study:  
The laboratory work should focus on implementation of concepts related to scheduling, memory 
management, synchronization and optimization using suitable simulators and programming 
languages. There should also be a case study in group with at most 4 students focusing on any 
real time system implemented system.  
 
Text Book s: 
1. Real-Time Systems, Jane W. S. Liu, Pe arson Education Asia, Latest Edition   
2. Real-Time Systems, Design Principles for Distributed Embedded Applications Kopetz, 
Hermann, Springer  Latest Edition  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 155 ---
147 
 Network and System Administration  
 
Course Title: Network and System Administration   Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20  
Course No: CSC4 86      Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course: Theory + Lab    Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description :  
The course covers different concepts of network and system administration including subjects 
ranging from initial installation of OS to day -to-day administrative tasks such as Network and 
Server Configurations, management of user accounts and disk space, and even imparting the 
trouble -shooting skills future system administrators will need  to cope with unexpected behavior.  
 
Course Objectives : 
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of network and 
system administration, configuration, and management.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Networking Overview (4 Hr s.) 
1.1 Overview of Reference Model (OSI, TCP/IP)  
1.2 Overview of IPv4 and IPv6 addressing  
1.3 Windows and Linux Networking Basics  
1.4 Switching and Routing basics  
1.5 Overview of SDN and OpenFlow  
 
Unit 2: Server Administration Basics (8 Hrs.)  
2.1 Open Source Server and Client Installation  
2.2 Linux installation, disk partitioning, logical volume manager  
2.3 Boot Process and Startup Services: Xinetd/Inetd  
2.4 Managing accounts: users, groups and other privileges  
2.5 File Systems and Quota Management  
2.6 Job Scheduling with cron, crontab, anacron an d system log analysis  
2.7 Process controlling and management  
2.8 Online Server upgrade/update process  
2.9 Administering Database, web, and proxy server  
2.10 Shell programming fundamentals  
 
Unit 3: Network Configuration Basics (7 Hrs.)  
3.1 Network Interface Configuration  
3.2 Diagno sing Network startup issues  
3.3 Linux and Windows Firewall configuration  
3.4  Network troubleshooting commands  
3.5 Introduction to network programming with Mininet  
3.6 SDN controller and dataplane communication  
3.7 Routing configuration in SDN  
3.8 Open source networking monitorin g (e.g. Nagios)  

--- PAGE 156 ---
148 
 Unit 4: Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) (3 Hrs.)  
4.1 DHCP Principle  
4.2 DHCP Options, Scope, Reservation and Relaying  
4.3 DHCP Troubleshooting  
 
Unit 5: Name Server and Configuration (7 Hrs.)  
5.1 DNS principles and Operations  
5.2 Basic Name Server and Client Configuration  
5.3 Caching Only name server  
5.4 Primary and Slave Name Server  
5.5 DNS Zone Transfers  
5.6 DNS Dynamic Updates  
5.7 DNS Delegation  
5.8 DNS Server Security  
5.9 Troubleshooting  
 
Unit 6: Web and Proxy Server Configuration (7 Hrs.)  
6.1 HTTP Server Configuration Basics  
6.2 Virtual Hosting  
6.3 HTTP Caching  
6.4 Proxy Caching Server Configuration  
6.5 Proxy ACL  
6.6 Proxy -Authentication Mechanisms  
6.7 Troubleshooting  
 
Unit 7: FTP, File, and Print Server (4 Hrs.)  
7.1 General Samba Configuration  
7.2 CUPS configuration basics  
7.3 FTP Principles  
7.4 Anonymous FTP Server  
7.5 Troubleshooting  
 
Unit 8: Mail Server basics (5 Hrs.)  
8.1 SMTP, POP and IMAP principles  
8.2 SMTP Relaying Principles  
8.3 Mail Domain Administration  
8.4 Basic Mail Server Configuration (Sendmail, postfix, qmail, exim..)  
8.5 SPAM control and Filtering  
8.6  Troubleshooting  
 
Laboratory work : 
The laboratory work includes all the features mentioned in the course.  
 
Samples:  
1. Server/Client Installation over VMware Environment  
2. Packet Analysis by using TCPDUMP and WIRESHARK  

--- PAGE 157 ---
149 
 3. Network Practice with Packet Tracer  
4. System Administration: User/Group management, File System Management ….  
5. Network Configuration:  Start/Stop network Service, network interface configuration  
6. Firewall Configuration  
7. DNS and DHCP Configuration and Troubleshooting  
8. Web and Proxy Server Configuration and Troubleshootin g 
9. Basic Mail Server Configuration and Troubleshooting  
10. SAMBA, NFS, CUPS and FTP configuration and Troubleshooting  
11. SDN controller installation and client network implementation (OpenDaylight)  
12. Network topology programming with Mininet and visualization  
 
Recom mended Books:   
1. The Practice of System and Network Administration, Second Edition  
Thomas A. Limoncelli, Christina J. Hogan, Strata R. Chalup  
2. Advanced Linux Networking, Roderick W. Smith, Addison -Wesley Professional (Pearson 
Education), 2002.  
3. Linux Network Administrator's Guide, Tony  Bautts, Terry  Dawson, Gregor N.  Purdy, 
O'Reilly, Third Edition, 2005  
 
Prerequisite:  Computer Networking Course  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 158 ---
150 
 Embedded System s Programming  
 
Course Title:  Embedded System s Programming    Full Marks:  60+20+20  
Course No:  CSC4 87       Pass Marks:  24 + 8 + 8  
Nature of the Course:  Theory + Lab     Credit Hrs:  3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
The course covers ARM based embedded system overview – assembly level programming, 
efficient C programming and embedded OS.  
 
Course Objective:  
The main objective of this course is to introduce the underlying principle of embedded system 
programming in assembly language and C language for ARM based embedded processor.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: ARM Em bedded System (4 Hrs .) 
Introduction to Embedded Systems, Introduction to RISC Design Philosophy, The ARM Design 
Philosophy, Embedded System Hardware, Embedded System Software  
 
Unit 2: ARM Processor Fundamentals (4 Hrs .) 
The Acron RISC Machine, The ARM Prog rammer’s Model, ARM Development Tools, 
Registers, Current Program Status Register, Pipeline, Exceptions, Interrupts, Vector Table, ARM 
Processor Families  
 
Unit 3: Introduction to ARM Instruction Set (8 Hrs .) 
Data Processing Instructions, Branch Instruction s, Load – Store instructions, Software Interrupt 
Instructions, Program Status Register Instructions, Loading Constraints, Conditional Execution  
 
Unit 4: Thumb Instruction Set (8 Hrs .) 
The Thumb bit in the CPSR, The Thumb Programmer’s Model, Thumb Branch In structions, 
Thumb Software Interrupt Instructions, Thumb Data Processing Instructions, Thumb Single 
Register Data Transfer Instructions, Thumb Multiple Register Data Transfer Instructions, Thumb 
Breakdown Instruction, Thumb Implementation, Thumb Applicatio n 
 
Unit 5: Efficient C Programming for ARM (8 Hrs .) 
Basic Data Types, Expressions, Conditional Statements, Loops, Function Calls, Procedures, Use 
of Memory, Pointer Aliasing, Bit Field  
 
Unit 6: Writing and Optimizing ARM Assembly Code (8 Hrs .) 
Writing Assembly Code, Profiling and Cycle Counting, Instruction Scheduling, Register 
Allocation, Conditional Execution, Looping Constructs, Bit Manipulation, Efficient Switches, 
Handling Unaligned Data  
 
Unit 7: Firmware and Embedded OS (5 Hrs .) 

--- PAGE 159 ---
151 
 Firmware and Bootl oader, Fundamental Components of Embedded OS, Embedded Linux, 
Android OS  
 
 
Laboratory Work s: 
Programming in C and Assembly (KEIL and PROTEUS), GPIO Programming (LED, LCD, 
Keypad, Buzzer)  
 
Text Book:  
1. Andrew N. Sloss, Dominic Symes, Chris Wright “ARM System Developer’s Guide: 
Designing and Optimizing  System Software”, Latest Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publisher, 
An imprint of Elsevier  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Steve Furber “ARM System – on – Chip Architecture”, Second Edition, Pearson Education 
Limited  
2. Warwick A. Smit h “C Programming for Embedded Micricontrollers”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 160 ---
152 
 International Business Management  
 
Course Title: International Business Management    Full Marks: 80 + 20  
Course No: MGT4 88       Pass Marks: 32+ 8 
Nature of the Course: Theory      Credit Hrs: 3 
Semester: VIII 
 
Course Description:  
This course contains globalization and international business , global economy and regional, 
international trade and investment theories and practices, national difference in political, 
economic and socio -cultural environment, strategies for international business and international 
financial environment to provide the basic knowledge to students.  
 
Course Objectives:  
The objective of this course is to familiarize students with the environment and challenges of  
doing business abroad. The course presents students with the opportunities to explore a number 
of issues and concerns relating to international business.  
 
Course Contents:  
Unit 1: Globalization and International Business (8 Hrs.)  
Concept of domestic, international and global business.  Opportunities and challenges of IB. 
Globalization: Concept and drivers, Types of globalization: economic, cultural, political, 
environmental, production, market. International Business Environment: Eco nomic, 
demographic, cultural and political -legal environment; Globalization  debate: positive and 
negative impact.  
 
Unit 2: Global Economy and Regional Economy (6 Hrs.)  
Global economy: concept, features and structures; changing demographics of global busine ss. 
MNCs: Concept, types, structures, strategies, and problems. Global economic integration: WTO 
(Origin, goals, structure, and functions). Regional economic integration levels: preferential 
trading, free trade areas, customs union, common market, economic union, and political union;  
International Economic Organizations: WTO, UNCTAD, World Bank, IMF  EU, NAFTA, 
SAFTA, BIMSTEC (Origin, goals and structure).  
 
Unit 3: National Differences in Socio -cultural Environment (3 Hrs.)  
Socio -cultural implication on IB. C ultural differences: Determinants of culture: Awareness, 
values, norms, communication, language and religion. Dealing with cultural differences.  
 
Unit 4: National Differences in Political Environment (3 Hrs.)  
Political systems: Democracy & totalitarian sp ectrum. Business -government relations. Political 
risk: concept and types. Impact of political environment on international business. Implications 
of legal systems in business. Intellectual property rights.  
 
Unit 5: National Differences in Economic Environm ent (3 Hrs.)  
Economic system: market, command, mixed. Determinants of economic development: Inflation, 
Income (GDP, per capita income nominal & PPP, HDI). Level of economic development: 
developed, developing, and emerging economies (World Bank’s Criteria).   

--- PAGE 161 ---
153 
  
Unit 6:  International Financial Environment (8 Hrs.)  
Foreign exchange markets, Spot market, spot rate quotations, bid -ask spreads, trading in spot 
markets, cross exchange rates, forward markets, forward rate, long and short forward positions, 
forwards premium and discount; Arbitrage, Hedging and Speculation; Types of exchange rate 
systems: fixed and floating, soft peg, crawling peg, free float, managed float; Factors affecting 
exchange rate - relative inflation rates, interest rates, relative interest ra tes, relative income levels, 
government controls, expectations; Mode of payment in international trade.  
 
Unit 7: Strategies for IB (6 Hrs.)  
International strategic management: Concept and importance; Modes of entry into a foreign 
market:Export and import; strategic alliances: equity based (wholly owned subsidiaries, 
acquisition, greenfield venture, equity alliances, joint venture) and contractual based (licensing, 
franchising, turnkey operations, BOT, management contract). FDI & portfolio investment: 
benefi ts and drawbacks.  
 
Unit 8: Functional Management and Operation of IB (8 Hrs.)  
Polycentric, ethnocentric, regiocentric and geocentric approach in functional management of IB. 
Global marketing strategies: Product strategy, distribution strategy, promotion st rategy, pricing 
strategy. Global production strategies: location, outsourcing, managing global supply chain. 
Global finance strategies: sources of fund, tax practices, tax haven. Global human resource 
management strategies: Staffing policy, expatriate mana gement, compensation, cultivating 
global mindsets.  
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Cavusgil S.T., Knight G. and Riesenberger J. (2017). International Business.  Fourth 
Edition.England: Pearson Education Limited.  
2. Hill, Charles and Hult, Tomas. (2019). International Business.  Twelfth Edition. New 
York:McGraw Hill Education.  
3. Daniel J.D., Radebaugh L.H., Sullivan D.P. (2015). International business. Fifteenth 
Edition.England: Pearson Education Limited.  
4. Rugman A.M. and Collinson, S. (2012).  International business.  Sixth Edution. 
England:Pearson Education Limited.  

